Medical and Recreational Marijuana: How They Affect Your Brain and Body
Medical marijuana is now legal in a majority of states. A small but growing number of states and cities have legalized recreational pot as well. Marijuana still is the most commonly used illegal drug in the U.S. Video Transcript American Cancer Society: “Marijuana and Cancer.”; Mayo Clinic: “Medical marijuana,” “Is medical marijuana legal?”; American Lung Association: “Marijuana and Lung Health.” AREFA CASSOOBHOY: Medical marijuana. It's in the news as more and more states legalize it. But what is it used for? Studies show that marijuana may help several conditions. It's most commonly prescribed for chemotherapy side effects like nausea, vomiting, or weight loss. Muscle spasms and stiffness caused by multiple sclerosis. Various pain syndromes and seizures. It can be taken several ways. Inhaled, either through smoke or vapor, as an edible like in a cookie or an herbal tea, or as a liquid under the tongue. But marijuana is not without side effects. It can cause dizziness, confusion, and drowsiness. It can worsen some mental illnesses like depression. And like cigarettes, when smoked, it can hurt your lungs. So if you live in a legal state, talk to your doctor. Like any treatment, you can weigh the benefits and risks to determine if medical marijuana is right for you. For WebMD, I'm Dr. Arefa Cassoobhoy. Marijuana has some well-proven benefits, including relief for long-term pain. But smoking marijuana can have some bad effects on your health, including making breathing problems worse. The federal ban on marijuana makes it hard to study its effects on humans. For example, very little research exists on edible marijuana.

Key Chemicals Marijuana comes from the dried flowers of cannabis plants.It has more than 500 chemicals. Cannabis can have a psychoactive -- or mind-altering -- effect on you. THC: This is the main psychoactive agent in marijuana. Its full name is delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol. When you smoke cannabis, THC goes from your lungs into your bloodstream and then into your brain. It stimulates the part of your brain that responds to sources of pleasure, like food and sex. That lets loose a chemical called dopamine, which causes the high. THC’s effects can vary depending on who you are, the potency of the strain, whether you smoke it or eat it, and other things. It can: Give you a relaxed sense of well-being

Heighten your senses, like make colors seem brighter

Change your sense of time

Make you anxious, afraid, or panicked

Make you hallucinate CBD. Also called cannabidiol, this is another well-studied compound. It doesn’t make you high. Instead, it can counteract the effects from THC and bring you down from any paranoia or anxiety. It also has been found to have beneficial uses in treatment the side effects of chemotherapy and treating epilepsy.