Cannabis/Marijuana
Causes

Associated features, development, and course as cataloged by the DSM-5:

Individuals who regularly use cannabis often report that it is being used to cope with mood, sleep, pain, or other physiological or mental health problems, and those diagnosed with cannabis use disorder frequently do have other concurrent mental disorders. Careful assessment typically reveals reports of cannabis use contributing to exacerbation of these same symptoms, as well as other reasons for frequent use (to experience euphoria, to forget about problems, in response to , as an enjoyable social activity). Related to this issue, some individuals who use cannabis multiple times per day for the aforementioned reasons do not perceive themselves as (and thus do not report) spending an excessive amount of time under the influence or recovering from the effects of cannabis, despite be­ing intoxicated on cannabis or coming down from it effects for the majority of most days. An important marker of a diagnosis, particularly in milder cases, is continued use despite a clear risk of negative consequences to other valued activities or relationships (school, work, sport activity, partner or relationship).

The onset of cannabis use disorder can occur at any time during or following , but onset is most commonly during adolescence or young adulthood. Although much less frequent, onset of cannabis use disorder in the preteen years or in the late 20s or older can occur. Recent acceptance by some of the use and availability of "medical marijuana" may increase the rate of onset of cannabis use disorder among older adults.



Generally, cannabis use disorder develops over an extended period of time, although the progression appears to be more rapid in adolescents, particularly those with pervasive conduct problems. Most people who develop a cannabis use disorder typically establish a pattern of cannabis use that gradually increases in both frequency and amount. Cannabis, along with tobacco and , is traditionally the first substance that adolescents try. Many perceive cannabis use as less harmful than alcohol or tobacco use, and this percep­tion likely contributes to increased use. Moreover, cannabis intoxication does not typically result in as severe behavioral and dysfunction as does significant alcohol intox­ication, which may increase the probability of more frequent use in more diverse situa­tions than with alcohol. These factors likely contribute to the potential rapid transition from cannabis use to cannabis use disorder among some adolescents and the common pattern of using throughout the day that is commonly observed among those with more severe problems.



Cannabis use disorder among preteens, adolescents, and young adults is typically ex­pressed as excessive use with peers that is a component of a pattern of other delinquent behaviors usually associated with conduct problems. Milder cases primarily reflect continued use despite clear problems related to disapproval of use by other peers, school ad­ministration, or family, which also places the youth at risk for physical or behavioral consequences. In more severe cases, there is a progression to using alone or using through­out the day such that use interferes with daily functioning and takes the place of previ­ously established, prosocial activities.