Medical and Surgical Therapy of Erectile Dysfunction
MUSE® signifies Medicated Urethral System for Erection. It contains alprostadil pellet. 2. Caverject® and Edex® both contain injectable alprostadil. Drug mixtures contain two or three of the following drugs: papaverine, phentolamine and prostaglandin, atropine.

The issue of cardiac safety and testosterone has received a great deal of media attention over the past several years. High profile publications in prestigious journals have reported increased rates of cardiovascular events and mortality in men using testosterone supplements ( 66 , 67 ). Testosterone is known to exert several effects that may increase cardiac risk. At the same time, the known benefits of testosterone include increased lean body mass, decreased adiposity, and improved insulin sensitivity ( 68 , 69 ). Men with low serum testosterone are known to be at greater risk of all-cause mortality ( 70 ). Higher rates of cardiac events in men taking testosterone supplement may be due to baseline risk rather than additional risk from supplementation.

Due to the well-established benefits of surgical or medical castration for the management of advanced prostate cancer there has been a long-standing concern that testosterone supplementation may increase the risk of prostate cancer. This relationship is based primarily on conjecture; there is an emerging body of literature which suggests that testosterone supplementation does not materially alter the risk of prostate cancer development ( 62 ). There is limited evidence that men with low serum testosterone may be at greater risk of aggressive prostate cancer ( 63 ), although there is currently no evidence that supplementation moderates this risk. In several small case series, men with successfully treated prostate cancer have been reported to have used testosterone supplements with no increase in risk for PSA recurrence. Some authors have also reported continued testosterone supplementation in men with untreated prostate cancer; until more data are available providers in general practice should exercise caution with respect to testosterone supplementation in men with untreated prostate cancer ( 64 , 65 ).

Testosterone treatment may contribute to polycythemia, acne, edema, and decreased HDL cholesterol. Testosterone may also lead to estrogen by aromatization in adipose tissue; this may lead to gynecomastia and theoretically to higher risk of deep venous thrombosis. Men receiving androgen replacement therapy require routine follow up appointments with measurement of hematocrit, serum testosterone and PSA. It is prudent to have more frequent checks in the early phase after initiation of therapy ( 33 ).

Recent refinements in testosterone supplementation include novel testosterone pellets, which are implanted in a minor office procedure and provide 2-4 months of therapeutic testosterone levels ( 60 ). A ten week depot testosterone preparation was recently approved for use in the United States; this long acting formulation may obviate the need for frequent injections ( 61 ). These long acting formulations may be considered for patients who have tolerated shorter acting formulations and reported significant benefit.

Several daily transdermal testosterone preparations (testosterone patches or gels) are available. Daily application of these preparations raises serum testosterone concentrations to within the normal range in over 90 percent of men. The most common adverse effects of testosterone patches are skin irritation and contact dermatitis. Gel formulations are less prone to skin irritation but care must be taken to avoid skin-to-skin contact and transfer of testosterone to others (e.g. spouse, children) for at least 2 hours post dosing ( 33 ).

Testosterone cypionate and enanthate are often used for intramuscular replacement therapy; a standard dosing regimen is 200 mg intramuscularly although different dosing regimens have been described. Lower doses at shorter intervals may produce less pronounced variation in serum testosterone levels between doses.

Historically, androgens were thought to enhance male sexual function. However, androgen therapy has only been shown to be of clinical benefit in men with low serum testosterone and symptoms potentially referable to hypogonadism ( 33 ). There is some controversy over what constitutes a “low” level of testosterone but a cut off for total testosterone between 300 and 400 ng/dL and free testosterone less than 65 pg/mL has general support ( 56 ). The benefit of supplementation in men with low serum testosterone primarily pertains to libido but improvements in erectile function ( 57 , 58 ) as well as improvements in response to PDE5I have been reported in select populations ( 59 ).

Type 5 Phosphodiesterase Inhibitors (PDE5I)

Oral therapy with a type 5 phosphodiesterase inhibitor (PDE5I, e.g.sildenafil, vardenafil, tadalafil, and avanafil) is considered first line therapy in men with ED (71). PDE5I block the inactivation of cGMP and result in increased smooth muscle relaxation and penile arterial blood flow. In the absence of sexual stimulation these medications have no effect on the penis. Numerous placebo-controlled studies have been conducted on the safety and efficacy of sildenafil since it was approved for clinical use in 1998 (72). Sildenafil has been consistently show to increase number of erections, penile rigidity, orgasmic function, and overall sexual satisfaction compared to placebo in men with ED of every etiology, including diabetes (73, 74). Similar data exist for the other drugs in this class.

Most clinical trials of PDE-5 inhibitors show only mild to moderate, self-limited adverse events associated with all of the PDE-5 inhibitors (75). The most common complaints in men using PDE-5 inhibitors are headache (16 percent), flushing (10 percent), dyspepsia (7 percent), nasal congestion (4 percent), and visual disturbances/ color sensitivity (3 percent). Tadalafil distinguishes itself from vardenafil and sildenafil by the relative lack of visual side effects. It does however have the possible adverse effect of back pain and/or myalgia (76).

PDE5I have an excellent track record of cardiac safety (77). To date, tens of millions of men in over 100 countries have used sildenafil (75). Since the release of the drug, over 200 deaths temporally associated with sildenafil therapy were reported to the Food and Drug Administration in the United States of America. Sexual activity was thought to be a likely contributor to myocardial infarction, with sildenafil acting to enable men not previously active to engage in sexual activity (78, 79). PDE5I therapy is safe for most men, although men with cardiovascular disease should consult with their cardiologist prior to engaging in sexual activity. The Princeton III guidelines provide recommendations for management of ED in men with cardiovascular disease. Princeton III recommends risk stratification before initiation of therapy; men at low-risk may be treated whereas men with high-risk (e.g. recent MI, unstable angina, NYHA Class III or IV heart failure, unstable arrythmia) should not be treated until their situation stabilizes. Men who do not fall neatly into low- or high-risk categories should undergo cardiac evaluation (48).

A lower starting dose (25 mg of sildenafil, 5 mg of vardenafil or tadalafil, 50 mg of avanafil) is recommended in patients who may attain and maintain higher plasma levels of PDE5I. These include patients who are older than 65, have severe renal impairment, or take potent CYP450 3A4 inhibitors. Patients who take ritonavir should not take more than 25 mg of Sildenafil in a 48-hour period.

Patients using PDE5I and requiring alpha-blocker therapy for hypertension or benign prostate hyperplasia should start at low doses of PDE5 inhibitor, which can be titrated to affect. To avoid symptomatic hypotension, PDE5 inhibitors should not be taken within 4 hours of an alpha-blocker. One study found a significant rate of hypotension (28% versus 6% with placebo) in patients taking concomitant doxazosin and tadalafil (80). The rate of hypotension matched that seen in placebo-treated patients in patients taking tamsulosin and tadalafil, and some studies suggest that the interaction has less clinical relevance in patients who have undergone long-term alpha-blocker therapy. It is likely that all four PDE5I commercially available in the US interact to some degree with alpha-blockers and that concurrent use of alpha-blockers and PDE5I may cause patients to develop orthostatic hypotension. Other antihypertensive agents appear to be well tolerated by men concurrently taking PDE5I.

Non-arteritic ischemic optic neuropathy (NAION) and PDE5I use has garnered a great deal of attention in both scientific and lay publications. Spontaneous NAION is the most common acute optic neuropathy and ranks second only to glaucoma as a cause of acquired optic neuropathy for men aged 50 and older. Estimated annual incidence is 2.3 to 10.3 per 100,000 and is more common in Caucasians than African Americans, Asians, or Hispanics. Most patients do not become legally blind, but the degree of visual acuity and visual field loss is typically significant. Risk factors common to NAION and ED include hypertension, diabetes mellitus, hypercholesterolemia, age over 50 years, coronary artery disease, and smoking (81, 82). A large review of ophthalmology records in the United States and Europe reported a very slight but statistically significant relationship between NAION and PDE5I use within the last 30 days. The authors concluded that use of PDE5I may be associated with an increase of approximately three NAION cases per 100,000 men over the age of 50 (83, 84). Men using PDE5I should be counseled to stop treatment and contact their physician immediately should visual changes or loss occur. Men with a history of NAION should not use PDE5 inhibitors (85).

PDE5I have also been implicated in several cases of hearing loss. Several dozen cases of PDE5 inhibitor associated hearing loss have been reported and some research has indicated mechanisms by which hearing loss may be attributable to action of these drugs (86, 87). Men who experience hearing impairment while using PDE5 inhibitors should halt treatment until they are able to speak with their doctors regarding long-term risk of hearing loss.

Table 4. View in own window 1. Men using nitrate drugs should not use PDE5I. If a man develops angina and has taken a PDE5I he should present to the ER rather than taking a short acting nitrate drug (e.g. nitroglycerin). 2. Men with stable coronary disease not needing nitrates on a consistent basis may take PDE5I if the risks of the medication have been carefully discussed with the patients by their physician. If the patient routinely requires nitrates for mild or moderate exercise induced angina, PDE5I should not be prescribed. 3. All men taking an organic nitrate (including recreational amyl nitrate) should be informed about the nitrate/PDE5I hypotensive interaction. 4. Men must be warned of the danger of taking PDE5I in the 24-hour period before or after taking a nitrate preparation. 5. Pre-PDE5I stress testing may be indicated in some men with cardiac disease to assess the risk of cardiac ischemia during sexual intercourse. 6. Initial monitoring of blood pressure after taking PDE5I may be indicated in: men with congestive heart failure who have borderline low blood pressure and low volume status; and men being treated with a complicated, multidrug antihypertensive regimen. * Adapted from materials provided by the American Heart Association and the Princeton III Consensus Conference (48, 88)

SILDENAFIL Sildenafil (Viagra®, Pfizer) works best when taken on an empty stomach and reaches maximum plasma concentrations within 30 to 120 minutes (mean 60 minutes). It is eliminated predominantly by hepatic metabolism, and the terminal half-life is about 4 hours. The recommended starting dose is 50 mg taken one hour before sexual activity. The maximal recommended frequency is once per day. Absorption of sildenafil is impaired by high fat foods. The efficacy of sildenafil has been extensively studied in patients with other coexisting diseases (89). No significant difference in response rate was noted comparing a normal cohort of patients with patients with hypertension (80), spinal cord injury (90), depression (91), prostate surgery (92), diabetes (93) and the elderly (94). Patients who have undergone radical prostatectomy have a lower response rate to sildenafil compared to a cohort of patients who had ED unrelated to pelvic surgery (92) ( ). Table 5. View in own window Response Cause of Erectile Dysfunction Diabetes Mellitus Spinal Cord Injury Radical Prostatectomy Psychogenic Depression (N = 268) (N = 178) (N = 107) (N = 179) (N = 151) Improved erection Placebo 10% 12% 15% 26% 18% Sildenafil 57% 83% 43% 84% 76% Successful intercourse Placebo 12% 13% N/A 29% NA Sildenafil 48% 59% 43% 70% N/A * Sildenafil dosage 50 to 100 mg (source: Sildenafil package insert (Pfizer Inc. New York, NY., 1998))

VARDENAFIL Vardenafil (Levitra® and Staxyn®, Bayer/GSK) is a potent and highly selective PDE5I. Its chemical structure is quite similar to sildenafil however in in vitro studies the selectivity and potency of vardenafil are superior. The medication can be given in either 10 or 20 mg oral dosage (Levitra®) or a 10 mg sublingual dissolving lozenge (Staxyn®). The time to peak plasma concentration is 40-55 minutes. Vardenafil has been shown to be highly efficacious in a wide range of clinical indications (95, 96). In one multicenter phase III trial patients with diabetes (type I and II) were found to respond to 20 mg dosage of vardenafil significantly better than a similar control group. The effect also seemed to improve after 12 weeks of treatment (97). Although similar in chemical structure, the in vitro potency and selectivity of vardenafil are superior to that of sildenafil. Robust evidence that these in vitro effects translate to superior results in vivo are lacking. Several newer studies have demonstrated vardenafil to have a faster onset of action than seen with other medications of the same class. In particular, one study (ONTIME) found that 21% of men with moderate to severe erectile dysfunction obtained erections of sufficient firmness for sexual intercourse at 11 minutes after using 20 mg of Vardenafil. At 25 minutes, 53% of patients obtained erections sufficient enough for penetration as compared to placebo (26%). The statistically superior response to vardenafil versus placebo was observed in all times from 11-25 minutes (98). Like sildenafil, absorption of vardenafil is impaired when the medication is taken after a high fat meal (99). The side effects most frequently seen with vardenafil include flushing, dyspepsia, headache and visual disturbances (100). Adverse events reported in men taking vardenafil closely resemble those in men taking sildenafil and tadalafil. Headache (21%), flushing (13%), dyspepsia (6%) are seen at various frequencies depending on dosages used.

TADALAFIL Tadalafil (Cialis®, Eli Lilly, USA) is a PDE5I which has a distinctly different chemical structure from vardenafil and sildenafil (76). Because tadalafil has lower affinity for PDE-6 (localized to the eye) it is associated with a low incidence of visual side effects. Tadalafil is dosed at 5, 10,and 20 mg on demand and is also available as a daily dose medication at 2.5 and 5 mg. Tadalafil’s erection potentiating effect may onset within 30-45 minutes of dosing but may last as long as 24-48 hours (101). As with the other PDE5I the side effect profile of this medication is quite mild. In addition to the lack of visual side effects, it also tends to have a reduced incidence of facial flushing compared to the other PDE5I. The incidence of back/muscle pain is generally higher with tadalafil as compared to other PDE5I. Absorption of tadalafil is minimally impacted upon by food intake. An integrated analysis from five randomized control double blind placebo trials revealed that men with varying severities of ED significantly improved with Tadalafil therapy at 10 and 20 mg dosages. The mean IIEF score (International Index of Erectile Dysfunction score) increased by 6.5 and 7.9 at the 10 and 20 mg dosage of tadalafil. This increase was statistically significant compared to placebo (102). In pharmacological studies tadalafil appears to be rapidly absorbed and reaches a peak serum concentration by 2 hours. The uniqueness of tadalafil appears to be in that its half-life is approximately 17.5 hours. The absorption and excretion of tadalafil does not appear to be affected by food or alcohol. With a 17.5 hour half-life tadalafil has a period of responsiveness of up to 36 hours. In a study of the delayed efficacy of tadalafil, at 36 hours post dose 62% of men taking the 20 mg treatment dose reported successful sexual intercourse compared to 33% of men who had taken placebo (103). Like sildanafil and vardenafil, tadalafil potentiates the hypotensive effects of nitric oxide and it is therefore contraindicated in patients taking nitrate medications. Tadalafil appears to be very well tolerated in most studies. The most frequently reported adverse events are headache and dyspepsia. Back pain, nasal congestion, myalgia and nasal congestion have also been reported but tend to be mild. The rate of treatment discontinuation from adverse events is low at 2.2% compared with the placebo discontinuation rate of 1.3% (102).

AVANAFIL A fourth PDE5 inhibitor called avanafil (stendra®, Vivus) was approved for use in the United States in May of 2012 and became commercially available in 2014 (104). The chemical structure of avanafil differs from that of the three other drugs from the PDE5 inhibitor class. Avanafil is available in 50, 100, and 200 mg dosing and is efficacious in men with diabetes related ED (104). Avanafil is distinguished by having a rapid onset of action and a half-life of approximately 5-10 hours (105). The side effect profile is relatively similar to other drugs from the PDE5 inhibitor class (106).