Prescription Drug Spending: Why Is the U.S. an Outlier?
Discussion: The Primacy of Price

Spending on prescription drugs in the U.S. far exceeds that in nine other high-income countries, a phenomenon that appears to be principally explained by the higher prices U.S. purchasers and consumers pay. Americans are more likely than their counterparts to bear this financial burden out-of-pocket — both because the U.S. is the only country among those studied with a large uninsured population, and because even Americans with insurance tend to have less protective benefits than people in other countries.

The importance of price in explaining high U.S. pharmaceutical spending is made apparent when we examine historical trends. The two eras when drug spending growth in the U.S. broke away from that in other high-income countries (the 1990s and 2014–15) took place when blockbuster drugs were hitting markets all over the world. Given that the U.S. generally pays higher prices for on-patent drugs, this influx may have caused its spending to rapidly outstrip that in other countries.

One reason U.S. prescription drug prices are higher may be the relative lack of price control strategies. Unlike the U.S., many other countries employ centralized price negotiations, national formularies, and comparative and cost-effectiveness research for determining price ceilings.14 In the U.S., health care delivery and payment are fragmented, with numerous, separate negotiations between drug manufacturers and payers and complex arrangements for various federal and state health programs.15 And, in general, the U.S. allows wider latitude for monopoly pricing of brand-name drugs than other countries are willing to accept.

Recent opinion polls have found that large majorities of Americans believe the government should be doing more to reduce the cost of prescription drugs.16 Ninety-two percent of U.S. adults favor letting the federal government negotiate lower drug prices for Medicare beneficiaries. Such a reform would mark a significant shift in U.S. policy toward the more centralized pricing determinations used in other high-income countries. Currently, the Veterans Health Administration and the Department of Defense are the only federal entities allowed to effectively negotiate directly with drug manufacturers; they pay prices that are roughly half of those paid at retail pharmacies.17

Granting Medicare — which finances well over a quarter of prescription expenditures — the properly designed authority to negotiate drug prices could help reduce costs for beneficiaries.18 Doing so could also potentially bring prices closer to those in other high-income countries. But given the maze of public and private payers in the U.S. health system, bringing down drug prices for all Americans will most likely require a suite of market-based and government-led pricing reforms.

The more moderate spending trends in the other nine countries also may reflect policies that result in new drugs and medical technologies being adopted more gradually.19 Other countries generally assess not just whether a new drug is effective, but whether it is more effective than existing therapies — and, in some cases, whether it is cost-effective. Thus, while U.S. per-person drug utilization may be similar to that in other high-income countries, new research indicates that the mix of drugs Americans consume includes a higher proportion of newer, more expensive medications — yet with no evidence of better health outcomes.

It is crucial to note that America’s higher spending on prescription drugs (and the higher prices Americans pay) does not necessarily mean the spending is wasteful. A larger, more profitable pharmaceutical sector may attract investments resulting in more innovative and effective drugs in the future. For this reason, policymakers who wish to reduce America’s prescription drug bill need to weigh, on the broader merits, the pros and cons of different cost-control policies.

Since implementation of the Affordable Care Act’s insurance expansions, there has been a clear improvement in access to pharmaceuticals and other health care services in the United States, the only one of the 10 countries in our study that lacks universal health coverage. Still, cost barriers remain far too common, especially for those Americans still without coverage. As policymakers and the public debate the future of the ACA, the goal should be to improve on the country’s recent gains, rather than to further restrict access to prescription drugs based on ability to pay.