Healthcare lobbyists are no strangers on the Hill
267 former aides who worked for four congressional committees pivotal in approving new healthcare legislation are registered lobbyists for clients from the health sector or health insurance industry, according to the Center for Responsive Politics’ analysis of Senate lobbying data.

(See all the data here)

In addition, 18 former lawmakers also swung through the revolving door and now serve health care clients as lobbyists, partners or counsel at well-known firms such as

Arent Fox LLP

,

Alston & Bird

or

Greenberg Traurig LLP

.

113 of the total 285 lobbyists specifically lobbied on the

American Health Care Act

, the health care bill passed by the House. Our lobbying data only goes through March 31

st

, so it is likely that all of these numbers will increase on July 21st when we collect lobbying information for the period from April 1

st

through June 30

th

. Unfortunately, very few clients discuss their position on legislation when disclosing their lobbying activities, so we cannot say which position these lobbyists were taking.

Some lobbyists and lobbying clients disclose their positions voluntarily. One such lobbyist, Mary Tirrell, was formerly an aide to Sen. Pat Toomey (R-Penn.) and now lobbies on health care issues as vice president of government and legislative affairs for

Lehigh Valley Hospital and Health Network

. Tirrell’s

most recent lobbying report

from the first quarter of 2017 shows she advocated for repealing the Affordable Care Act and replacing it with the House of Representatives’ American Health Care Act. Her past lobbying reports show a history of involvement with various health care issues. Previously, Tirrell served as director of community and economic development for Rick Santorum when he was a senator for Pennsylvania.

Another revolver also worked for one of the Senate’s “swing votes.”

Amanda Makki

was a legislative aide to Sen. Lisa Murkowski (R-Alaska) for almost eight years, and eventually became her top healthcare adviser. Before that she was a health policy adviser to Rep. Jeff Fortenberry (R-Neb.). In 2014, she left her work in Congress to become a lobbyist. Now, she is director of external affairs and FDA for Novo Nordisk, a global diabetes care company. Her

most recent lobbying report

from the first quarter of 2017 shows her involvement in issues such as prescription drug use and diabetes prevention. She also lobbied on the House of Representatives’ American Health Care Act.

Some organizations have taken public positions on the AHCA and the Senate’s still-under debate Better Healthcare Reconciliation Act. The

American Medical Association

, which represents doctors,

opposes

both the House and Senate healthcare packages. Three of its lobbyists have insider connections.

Sage Eastman

and

Lauren Aronson

both used to work for the House Ways and Means Committee and now lobby for Mehlman, Castagnetti et al.

Andrew Wankum

, one of the AMA’s staff lobbyists, worked for Rep. Kevin Brady (R-Texas) prior to lobbying.

The largest trade association for the insurance industry,

America’s Health Insurance Plans

(AHIP) issued a

more measured response

to the AHCA, supporting some revisions in the House plan but expressing concern about others. AHIP had three revolving door connections to the health care committees or members.

Blue Cross/Blue Shield

, the largest insurance company in the US, issued a similar statement, and has 15 connections.

The client with the most revolving door connections is the

Pharmaceutical Research & Manufacturers of America

. PhRMA, the largest trade association representing the pharmaceutical industry, has not yet taken a position on the healthcare bills

These 285 revolving door lobbyists and their spouses have donated $3.8 million since 2008 to members of Congress serving on these committees — including $1.3 million during the 2016 cycle.

Jeffrey MacKinnon

, who represents 12 health care clients through his firm Farragut Partners, donated $191,450 since 2016 to mostly Republicans. MacKinnon was Rep. Joe Barton’s (R-Texas) Legislative Director in the early 1990s.

OpenSecrets keeps money in politics transparent and accountable. Please support our work by making a donation today. Help us count cash and make change by making a donation today.

These revolving door lobbyists have donated much more money to Republican members of the five healthcare-focused committees than to Democrats, particularly in 2016, which is unsurprising given that there are more Republicans in Congress. Although many of these lobbyists have diverse client rosters, with clients from other sectors besides health care, the spike in donations to Republicans in 2016 is striking.

While the partisan breakdown of giving during the past few cycles by health care lobbyists who are not revolvers is similar to that for revolvers, the likelihood of giving is much lower. Of the 1,121 healthcare lobbyists who have not been through the revolving door just 262, or less than a quarter, have given a total of $2.4 million to members of the relevant congressional committees since 2007. By contrast, almost two-thirds of revolvers made contributions to committee members. Another notable difference – prior to 2014 non-revolvers gave considerably more of their money to Democrats, while revolvers gave equally to both major parties, even slightly favoring Republicans.

Dan Auble provided the data for this story, Sara Swann and Ashley Balcerzak contributed reporting.



For permission to reprint for commercial uses, such as textbooks, contact the Center: Feel free to distribute or cite this material, but please credit the Center for Responsive Politics.For permission to reprint for commercial uses, such as textbooks, contact the Center: [email protected]

Support Accountability Journalism At OpenSecrets.org we offer in-depth, money-in-politics stories in the public interest. Unlike many media outlets, we keep our content paywall-free and accessible to all. And whether you’re reading about 2020 presidential fundraising, conflicts of interest or “dark money” influence, we produce this content with a small, but dedicated team. OpenSecrets is independent and non-partisan, allowing us to write about what is most important to our readers, free of commercial and political bias. We give it to you straight, with fact-based stories that do not favor any one party or viewpoint. This allows us to expose powerful interests and promote transparency without being beholden — to anyone. Every donation we receive from users like you goes directly into promoting high-quality data analysis and investigative journalism that you can trust. Your help is essential to maintain OpenSecrets as not just a news source that cuts through the noise, but as a force multiplier that provides the public and reporters with data to defend democracy. Please support our work and keep this resource free. Thank you. Support OpenSecrets ➜

Support Accountability Journalism At OpenSecrets.org we offer in-depth, money-in-politics stories in the public interest. Whether you’re reading about 2020 presidential fundraising, conflicts of interest or “dark money” influence, we produce this content with a small, but dedicated team. Every donation we receive from users like you goes directly into promoting high-quality data analysis and investigative journalism that you can trust.Please support our work and keep this resource free. Thank you. Support OpenSecrets ➜

About The Author Sarah, who joined the Center in April 2011, is responsible for overseeing the Center's data analysis and research collaborations. She previously worked as the Center's lobbying and revolving door researcher. Prior to joining OpenSecrets, Sarah was a doctoral student at the Ohio State University, where she also taught undergraduate political science courses in political behavior. Her dissertation, entitled "Politicians Behaving Badly: The Determinants and Outcomes of Political Scandal in Post-Watergate America," incorporates both original data collection and political experiments. She received her Ph.D. from Ohio State in 2014, and her B.A. in political science and biology in 2006. Follow Sarah Bryner

Read more of Sarah's posts

See more data on the healthcare debate here