"BEFORE ABRAHAM WAS, I AM" – What Did Jesus Mean?
Before Abraham Was, I AM "Before Abraham was, I AM" - John 8

JOHN 8:56-59 56 “ Your father Abraham rejoiced to see My day, and he saw it and was glad.” 57 Then the Jews said to Him, “You are not yet fifty years old, and You have seen Abraham?” 58 Jesus said to them, “Truly, truly, I say to you , before Abraham was, I AM.” 59 Then they took up stones to throw at Him; but Jesus hid Himself and went out of the temple, going through the midst of them, and so passed by.



When did they take up stones?

When Jesus said, "Before Abraham was, I AM" (John 8:58).

Why did they take up stones?

To stone Jesus to death.

When would you expect them to be angry enough to try to kill Jesus?

When He called them the sons of the devil (see John 8:44 in Father Abraham).

To them, why was Jesus declaring "Before Abraham was, I AM" worse than calling them the sons of the devil?

“I AM” is the name God gave Himself in Exodus 3:13-14: "Then Moses said to God, “Indeed, when I come to the children of Israel and say to them, ‘The God of your fathers has sent me to you,’ and they say to me, ‘What is His name?’ what shall I say to them?” And God said to Moses, “I AM WHO I AM.” And He said, “Thus you shall say to the children of Israel, ‘I AM has sent me to you.’ ” Jesus was declaring in terms that are crystal clear to them that He is God, and that's what enraged them enough to try to kill Him.

How did Jesus hide Himself and go through "the midst of them" (John 8:59)?

The same way He did when the people tried to kill Him upon hearing His very first sermon in Nazareth: "So all those in the synagogue, when they heard these things, were filled with wrath, and rose up and thrust Him out of the city; and they led Him to the brow of the hill on which their city was built, that they might throw Him down over the cliff. Then passing through the midst of them, He went His way" (Luke 4:28-30).

How can God make Himself invisible and walk through a crowd?



What did Jesus mean by “Your father Abraham rejoiced to see My day, and he saw it and was glad" (John 8:56)?

Abraham saw Jesus and was glad.

How could Abraham, who lived two thousands years before Jesus was born, have seen Jesus?

Jesus appeared to him with God the Father and even spoke to him. Read the explanation below Genesis 15. Note that Abraham is still called "Abram" in these early chapters of Genesis.