Braid: UCP health care policy invites return to PC-era chaos
Health care isn’t a giant issue in this election campaign — not yet anyway. But it may once again hit the heights when the dire risks of UCP health promises sink in.

Jason Kenney’s party would freeze spending. Any fresh funding for the front lines would come from cash saved through cuts to administration, or unexpected improvements to the fiscal picture.

That’s not going to work. In fact, it guarantees a return to the chaos of the Progressive Conservative years, and maybe worse, because there would be no panic spending spikes to save the day.

This seems to be slipping under voter radar because health care is no longer a hair-pulling crisis.

It ranks fourth in importance to voters, tied at 24 per cent with government spending, according to a recent Angus Reid Institute survey.

The big issues, unsurprisingly, are energy and pipelines (49 per cent), and jobs, unemployment and the economy, all at 41 per cent.

Health care was a much bigger deal in elections past. Now it isn’t top of mind. Why?

The NDP calmed down the system, made significant improvements and provided stability for health planners, professionals and workers.

The giant, complex structure now costs $22 billion a year. It’s expensive and far from perfect, as the NDP will admit. Some wait times are growing.

But health care access and delivery are far more level and reliable than they were in 2015.

That was essential after a decade of erratic funding and political interference from PC ministers who couldn’t keep their hands off.

The NDP has also eliminated the PCs’ messy public fights over who runs the system.

Shortly after winning in 2015, the NDP picked a board of able people who understand the government is the ultimate boss, period. So there’s no point arguing over policy or direction.

The NDP promised, and delivered, relatively modest but consistent funding hikes equivalent to population growth plus inflation — between three and four per cent annually.

In the dying Progressive Conservative years, spending increases spiked from four per cent to more than six per cent, then down to two per cent, and up to nearly seven per cent. If oil prices dropped, a patient could almost expect the IV to drain out.

Staffing and programs were flatlined, resuscitated and then put through the same survival cycle again. It was chaotic for doctors, nurses and too often for patients.

Now the UCP proposes something even worse — real-world cuts, with no apparent hope of a corresponding hike the next year.

Related

Holding the line on funding means the system loses to inflation; a 1.5 per cent value drop every year. That’s without counting the extra demands of population growth and aging.

A UCP freeze would thus reduce real-world health care resources by about three per cent annually.

Unless, that is, a Kenney government could make up the difference by cutting administration, after a review of Alberta Health Services to be completed by Dec. 31.

By finding efficiencies everywhere, but relying mostly on administrative and management cuts, Kenney hopes to save between $350 million and $450 million.

Even if he can do that, the funding gap created by a freeze can never be filled.

Kenney could fire every single executive, manager, planner and co-ordinator and eliminate the whole network of central services — and still only save enough to keep front-line funding stable for one year!

Alberta’s health administration costs, as a percentage of spending, are the lowest of any province at 3.3 per cent. The national average is 4.5. Ontario is by far the worst, at 5.8 per cent.

Alberta spends $726 million a year on administration. Recouping every penny — not that it’s even possible — could only happen once.

After that, the system would still be left with frozen funding that is actually a major funding loss every year.

While signing his health-care guarantee, Kenney said, “If we can find the money, there will be increases in the health budget. There will be no cuts.”

That sounds a lot better than it could ever be.

Don Braid’s column appears regularly in the Calgary Herald.

dbraid@postmedia.com

Twitter: @DonBraid

Facebook: Don Braid Politics