Six other NHS trusts at risk of 'bankruptcy'
South London Healthcare NHS Trust will be the first in the country to be put under the control of a special administrator tasked with securing its finances.

The trust, which runs three hospitals, has been criticised over standards of care after being saddled with large debts from PFI deals.

Despite efforts to improve its financial performance, it is still thought to be on track to lose between £30 and £75 million a year for the next five years.

It was formally warned last night that it would be the first NHS body to be taken over by Whitehall-appointed administrators under the “unsustainable providers’ regime”.

Now it has emerged that up to 22 NHS trusts are facing serious financial difficulties because of expensive PFI schemes, with six thought to have taken on projects viewed by ministers as "unsustainable".

They all face taking urgent steps to turn around their fortunes.

Among those in jeopardy are Ealing Hospitals Trust, North Cumbria University Hospital Trust and Surrey and Sussex Healthcare Trust.

Professor Chris Ham, chief executive of the leading health think-tank the Kings Fund said the "administration" was a sign of things to come.

He said a special administrator would look at a wider range of options, including splitting up the trust's services and "disposing of them to other providers".

"South London Healthcare NHS Trust is one of a small number of hospitals facing serious financial challenges," he said.

"For some of these hospitals, the usual solutions, such as appointing a new management team or merging with another provider, will not solve their problems.

"Governments have ducked these issues for too long so this announcement is an important signal of intent from ministers.

"The first priority must be to ensure continuity of patient care for the services that must remain at these hospitals.

"For other services more radical options need to be looked at, including transferring services to other hospitals, or stopping that care altogether."

Labour accused the Government of "losing its grip" on NHS finances.

"After many years of neglect by the Tories, Labour used PFI to deliver the biggest hospital-building programme in the history of the NHS, benefiting millions of patients," a spokesman said.

"In contrast, this government has lost its grip on NHS finances and is wasting billions of pounds on a NHS reorganisation which is opposed by patients and health professionals."

Meanwhile the trust's chief executive, Dr Chris Streather, welcomed the appointment of an administrator

"There is a huge gap in our financial plan in order for us to become viable in the long term," he told BBC Radio 4's Today programme.

"This intervention, if it solves that problem which it is designed to do, is absolutely welcome and will be helpful.

"It just needs to be done in a way that keeps all those gains in quality that we have made over the last three and a half years."

The administrator will take over the board and recommend measures to the Health Secretary to put the trust's finances on a sustainable basis.

The trust runs Queen Mary's in Sidcup, the Queen Elizabeth in Woolwich and the Princess Royal University Hospital in Bromley.

It released a statement reassuring patients that services would continue as normal.

They said the hospital's deficit last year – covered by money from elsewhere in the NHS budget – was equivalent to the salaries of 1,200 nurses or 200 hip replacements a week.

In his letter the Health secretary Andrew Lansley wrote: "I recognise that South London Healthcare NHS Trust faces deep and long-standing challenges, some of which are not of its own making.

"Nonetheless, there must be a point when these problems, however they have arisen, are tackled. I believe we are almost at this point.

"I have sought to provide NHS organisations with the help and support they need to provide these high quality, sustainable services to their patients, which South London Healthcare NHS Trust stands to benefit from.

"However, even after this support has been provided, your organisation still expects to be in need of significant financial resources from other parts of the NHS and I cannot permit this to continue. That is why I am considering using these powers."

He acknowledged the move would be "unsettling for staff" but said the measures were necessary to ensure hospital services in south east London had "a sustainable future".

Other NHS trusts that are trying to improve their financial situation may also face being put in special measures if they do not make progress quickly enough.

The source close to Mr Lansley said Labour brought the south London trust to "the brink of bankruptcy".

"Labour turned a blind eye to these problems for years. They burdened it with two unaffordable PFIs worth £61 million a year and they crippled the organisation with debt from the beginning," the source said.

"The standard of care that patients receive at the hospital trust is not good enough, although there have been some improvements in recent months.

"It is crucial that those improvements are not put at risk by the challenge of finding the huge savings that the trust needs to make."

The trust pointed out that it had one of the lowest mortality rates in England and infection rates three times lower than the national average.

In a statement, it said: "We have entered into discussions with the Department of Health and NHS London on the best future for the Trust and our priority, and that of others involved, is to make sure that our long-standing and well-known financial issues are resolved.

"Our staff have worked hard for patients and in spite of significant financial issues, we are extremely proud that we now have among the lowest mortality and infection rates in the country.

"We expect these discussions to come to a conclusion in the second week in July when a decision will be taken by the Secretary of State.

"In the meantime we can reassure local patients and the public that our staff will continue to provide services as normal."

NHS Confederation deputy chief executive David Stout said: "NHS leaders have made it clear that short term fixes for struggling trusts are no longer possible.

"More decisive action is going to be needed to help the NHS maintain services and stay in financial balance during this unprecedented spending squeeze.

"We welcome the secretary of state's actions as a sign that the Government is beginning to grasp the nettle on some of these difficult issues.

"When taking over a trust, it is important that the administrator looks beyond hospital care to consider primary and community care in order to make sure services are placed back on a financially sustainable footing."

Have you been affected by the financial problems at South London NHS Health care Trust? Tell us your story at mynews@telegraph.co.uk