41 Inspiring Quotes That Will Get You Through Even the Toughest Day
If you're having one of those days, here are 41 quotes that will inspire you to pick yourself up and keep going.

1. "The best way to cheer yourself is to try to cheer someone else up." --Mark Twain

3. "Problems are not stop signs; they are guidelines." --Robert Schuller

4. "Remember that guy that gave up? Neither does anyone else." --Unknown

5. "When you come to the edge of all that you know, you must believe one of two things: There will be ground to stand. Or you will grow wings to fly." --O.R. Melling

6. "It's better to be in the arena, getting stomped by a bull, than to be up in the stands or out in the parking lot." --Steven Pressfield

7. "Success isn't permanent and failure isn't fatal; it's the courage to continue that counts." --Mike Ditka

8. "Courage doesn't always roar. Sometimes courage is the little voice at the end of the day that says I'll try again tomorrow." --Mary Anne Radmacher

9. "You shouldn't focus on why you can't do something, which is what most people do. You should focus on why perhaps you can, and be one of the exceptions." --Steve Case

10. "Watch the sunrise at least once a year, put a lot of marshmallows in your hot chocolate, lie on your back and look at the stars, never buy a coffee table you can't put your feet on, never pass up a chance to jump on a trampoline, don't overlook life's small joys while searching for the big ones." --H. Jackson Brown Jr.

11. "When you get into a tight place and everything goes against you, till it seems as though you could not hold on a minute longer, never give up then, for that is just the place and time that the tide will turn." --Harriet Beecher Stowe

12. "There's nothing wrong or evil about having a bad day. There's everything wrong with making others have to have it with you." --Neil Cavuto

13. "Someday everything will make perfect sense. So, for now, laugh at the confusion, smile through the tears, and keep reminding yourself that everything happens for a reason." --Unknown

14. "Some days you tame the tiger. And some days the tiger has you for lunch." --Tug McGraw

15. "The one law that does not change is that everything changes, and the hardship I was bearing today was only a breath away from the pleasures I would have tomorrow, and those pleasures would be all the richer because of the memories of this I was enduring." --Louis L'Amour

16. "You make mistakes. Mistakes don't make you." --Maxwell Maltz

17. "Most of the important things in the world have been accomplished by people who have kept on trying when there seemed to be no hope at all." --Dale Carnegie

18. "There is neither happiness nor unhappiness in this world; there is merely the comparison of one state to the other. Only a man who has felt ultimate despair is capable of feeling ultimate bliss." --Alexandre Dumas

19. "Many of life's failures are people who did not realize how close they were to success when they gave up." --Thomas Edison

20. "It's just a bad day. Not a bad life." --Unknown

21. "You may encounter many defeats, but you must not be defeated. In fact, it may be necessary to encounter the defeats, so you can know who you are, what you can rise from, how you can still come out of it." --Maya Angelou

22. "Life is short. Smile while you still have teeth." --Unknown

23. "Don't be discouraged. It's often the last key in the bunch that opens the lock." -- Unknown

24. "No one is going to hand me success. I must go out and get it myself. That's why I'm here. To dominate. To conquer. Both the world and myself." --Unknown

25. "Things don't go wrong and break your heart so you can become bitter and give up. They happen to break you down and build you up so you can be all that you were intended to be." --Samuel Johnson

26. "Every strike brings me closer to the next home run." --Babe Ruth

27. "The happiest people don't necessarily have the best of everything, they just make the best out of everything that comes their way." --Unknown

28. "When things are bad, we take comfort in the thought that they could always get worse. And when they are, we find hope in the thought that things are so bad they have to get better." --Malcolm S. Forbes

29. "What lies behind you and what lies in front of you pales in comparison to what lies inside of you." --Ralph Waldo Emerson

30. "Pain is temporary. Quitting lasts forever." --Lance Armstrong

31. "You yourself, as much as anybody in the entire universe, deserve your love and affection." --Gautama Buddha

32. "The only time you fail is when you fall down and stay down." --Stephen Richards

33. "Count your age by friends, not years. Count your life by smiles, not tears." --John Lennon

34. "Tough times never last, but tough people do." --Robert H. Schuller

35. "If you're reading this ... Congratulations, you're alive. If that's not something to smile about, then I don't know what is." --Chad Sugg

36. "Every single day is a good day no matter how bright or dark it is, because it always brings an opportunity to start a positive beginning in your life." --Edmond Mbiaka

37. "For every minute you are angry you lose 60 seconds of happiness." --Ralph Waldo Emerson

38. "Being happy doesn't mean you're perfect. It just means you've decided to look beyond the imperfections." --K.B. Indiana

39. "Every day may not be good, but there's something good in every day." --Unknown

40. "You don't develop courage by being happy in your relationships everyday. You develop it by surviving difficult times and challenging adversity." --Epicurus