Is Mexico City Safe for Travel in 2019?
Is Mexico City Safe for Travel in 2019?

ViaHero · Updated March 14, 2019

Although other areas of Mexico are under U.S. travel advisories and warnings, Mexico City is not under any travel restrictions.

Like all other major cities, certain areas should be avoided and necessary precautions taken to ensure your security. Visitors are highly encouraged to remain aware of their surroundings to avoid potentially dangerous situations.

Want to explore Mexico differently? Have a local plan your trip.

Here are important tips for safe travel in Mexico City, including which colonias (neighborhoods) are most visitor-friendly, what areas should be avoided, and other safety concerns. Any questions? Send us a message.

Mexico City Neighborhoods

Mexico City is composed of 350 colonias (neighborhoods), which may initially seem intimidating but in fact are easy to navigate once you get a feel for the city.

Mexico City actually has an incredibly high police-to-civilian ratio at 1:100, helped by 11,000 security cameras around the city itself.

Proximity to the more modern parts of Mexico City generally results in higher levels of personal security. You don’t have to sacrifice comfort or security to find authentic things to do in Mexico City.

The neighborhoods of Roma , Juarez, Polanco , San Rafael, and Condesa are safe during the daytime and nighttime.

The safety of Mexico City’s historic Centro area is widely debated. Most sources advise staying away from Centro after dark, especially alleyways and the neighborhoods of Merced and Tepito.

The neighborhoods of Centro and Bella Artes are very welcoming of visitors and are considered safe, but for peace of mind, should not be explored after dark.

Tourist attractions like Plaza de Las Tres Culturas and the canals of Xochimilco are safe during the day but should not be explored at night.

Pro tip: to experience these highlights safely and authentically, to experience these highlights safely and authentically, take a locally-guided tour . You can have a local trip planner help you set it up or add it to your existing Mexico City itinerary.

A handful of neighborhoods should be avoided entirely, including Tepito, Doctores , Ciudad Neza, and Iztapalapa.

Many locals don’t go to these areas either—to experience Mexico City’s culture, stick to the beaten path.

Safety Concerns

Petty theft/scams

Like any city, Mexico City has its fair share of pickpockets and common scams to look out for. Here are some easy ways to avoid them.

Scams tend to occur in crowded areas, like in the metro or outdoor markets.

If a stranger asks for money, your phone, or documents, say no and continue on your way, or just ignore them.

Withdraw money from the airport or hotel ATMs, steering clear of random, unmarked ATMs.

As a rule of thumb, pay with cash instead of a card to protect personal information.

When traveling in Mexico City , always keep an eye on valuable items, which should be kept as close to your person as possible.

Wear bags as cross-body, always keeping zippers and pockets in sight.



Keep high-value jewelry, watches, and other accessories at home for more peace of mind.

Kidnapping/mugging

As is the case in many Latin American countries, Mexico City sometimes experiences kidnappings. While very rare, it’s better to be safe than sorry. Protect yourself with this information, and for even more safety, have a Mexico City local help plan your trip (you could do everything yourself, but why risk it?).

Kidnappings in Mexico City occur based on perceived vulnerability, but foreigners are rarely targeted .

In a popular scam, some visitors receive calls or emails saying that their travel companion has been kidnapped. Just hang up, and report the call to local police.

Do not provide personal information (i.e., phone number, hotel location, email address) to anyone outside of your party, even to shopkeepers or public surveys.

Express kidnappings are a form of mugging when a taxi driver temporarily abducts their passenger and forces them to withdraw all their money from an ATM.

These unfortunate incidents can easily be avoided by ordering an Uber , which are very affordable in Mexico City.

Female and solo travelers

Solo travel is a rising trend worldwide, and exploring Mexico City on your own can be a fantastic experience.

Research the area before you go— female travel bloggers who share their solo travel experiences are a great resource.

For lone travelers of any gender, it is always necessary to keep your wits about you. By protecting your personal info and not accepting drinks or food from strangers, you’ve got a solid security basis.

It's always a good idea to get tips from Mexico City travel expert before you fly. Don't travel blindly—make sure a local's got your back.

Some scams are geared specifically toward solo travelers.

Fake police officers may approach lone tourists and tell them to provide certain documents or to come to the station. Never provide any personal info, and immediately call Mexico’s police number, #112 or #911.

Do research about specific cultural customs—blending in pays off in terms of safety.

Dress modestly, opting for longer shorts and tops with short or elbow-length sleeves.

Drugs and illegal substances

For the most part, Mexico’s war on drugs is occurring far away from Mexico City.

Mexico City is cracking down on its cartels—many of Mexico City’s high-ranking cartel members have been arrested as recently as 2018.

Odds are that you will not be offered drugs or be caught in a drug deal, especially if you stay away from particular neighborhoods. (Scroll up to Mexico City Neighborhoods for more.)

Drinking water and food quality

Bottled water is generally more reliable and clean than Mexico City’s tap water or soft drinks.

Don’t add ice to your drinks.

Restaurants must meet water-health codes, so the tap water in well-known restaurants (not street vendors) is likely safe to drink.

Watch your drinks being made—if you don’t feel drinking comfortable what went into your cup, go somewhere else.

Don’t accept drinks from anyone outside of your party.

Should you feel ill after drinking alcoholic or non-alcoholic beverages, go to one of the three Mexico City hospitals approved by the Joint Commission International.

Watch how your food is made, especially with street food vendors. Food poisoning typically is not deliberate but can happen when ingredients aren’t stored properly.

Be open to trying new foods, but stay away from more risky meats like monkey , guinea pig, or bat.

Although some markets sell exotic foods (like lion or crocodile), odds are that these foods are illegal and do not meet most or any health standards.

Conclusion

Is Mexico City safe for travel in 2018? Absolutely! Just keep your wits about you, stay aware, and have a fantastic time. For extra security, get some insider info from a Mexican local for help planning your trip—they’ll make sure you don’t venture anywhere you shouldn’t, and provide 24/7 on-the-ground support. For more info, check out these Mexico City travel FAQs.

Everyone in your party should have a copy of this emergency contact info:

National Emergency Number: 411 or 911

Green Angels Tourist Assistance: 078

Public Ministry Agency: 5200-9000

U.S. Embassy in Mexico City:

Calling from Mexico: (01-55) 5080-2000

Calling from the U.S.: 011-52-55-5080-2000

After hours emergencies: 01-52-55-5080-2000, press 0 for the duty officer

With all these tips and tricks to assure safety in Mexico City, a trip there is a must! But before your trip, make sure to check out: