Libertarians for Life Homepage
To read our articles, check the Library!

Get your LFL bumperstickers here!



Abortion and Rights,

a special edition of the International Journal of Sociology and Social Policy, is devoted to articles contributed by LFL. It was edited by Doris Gordon and John Walker of LFL. Single copies are available from LFL as a fundraiser for a contribution of $25.00 or more. (Contributions to LFL are not tax deductible.)



Life, Rights,

and Rock 'n' Roll

Gary Cherone

poses some questions

to Eddie Vedder

-- Part II "My hope is to introduce as many who will listen, regardless of where they stand, to Libertarians for Life. For their arguments are persuasive, reasoning from science and philosophy. Anyone with an objective mind will find them hard to ignore."

-Gary Cherone



If you like our website, please help!

Please send check or money order to:

Libertarians for Life

13424 Hathaway Drive

Wheaton, MD 20906

Contributions to LFL are not tax deductible.



The Libertarian Case Against Abortion One popular misconception is that libertarianism as a political principle supports choice on abortion. And major elements within the libertarian movement (the Libertarian Party, for example) take abortion-choice stands. Nonetheless, libertarianism's basic principle is that each of us has the obligation not to aggress against (violate the rights of) anyone else -- for any reason (personal, social, or political), however worthy. That is a clearly pro-life principle. Recognizing that, and seeing the abortion-choice drift within the libertarian movement, Libertarians for Life was founded in 1976 to show why abortion is a wrong under justice, not a right. We see our mission as presenting the pro-life case to libertarians and the libertarian case to pro-lifers. Among supporters of LFL, some of us are members of the Libertarian Party, some are not. Some are religious, some are not. (Doris Gordon, our Founder and Coordinator, is a Jewish atheist.) Our reasoning is expressly scientific and philosophical rather than either pragmatic or religious, or merely political or emotional. To explain and defend our case, LFL argues that:



1. Human offspring are human beings, persons from conception, whether that takes place as natural or artificial fertilization, by cloning, or by any other means.



2. Abortion is homicide -- the killing of one person by another.



3. One's right to control one's own body does not allow violating the obligation not to aggress. There is never a right to kill an innocent person. Prenatally, we are all innocent persons.



4. A prenatal child has the right to be in the mother's body. Parents have no right to evict their children from the crib or from the womb and let them die. Instead both parents, the father as well as the mother, owe them support and protection from harm.



5. No government, nor any individual, has a just power to legally "de-person" any one of us, born or preborn.



6. The proper purpose of the law is to side with the innocent, not against them.



For more, please read LFL's literature in the Library.

Join lfl-discuss! This discussion is unmoderated.



