Doctors say abortions do sometimes save women's lives
CLOSE

Abortions are sometimes needed to save the lives of pregnant women, several medical experts said in response to comments from Rep. Joe Walsh.

Pro-life activists gather on Jan. 23 near the U.S. Supreme Court in Washington, D.C. Activists on both sides marked the anniversary of the Roe v. Wade decision. (Photo: Brendan Hoffman, Getty Images) Story Highlights Some medical experts counter Rep. Joe Walsh's statement

OB-GYN group says abortions may be necessary to save mother's life

Walsh backed off his statement, citing "very rare circumstances"

Abortions are sometimes needed to save the lives or health of pregnant women, several medical experts said Friday, countering comments that were made and then partially retracted by Illinois Rep. Joe Walsh. Even a leading group opposing abortion, the National Right to Life Committee, issued a statement saying that its position is "to allow abortion if necessary to prevent the death of the mother."

Walsh, who is seeking reelection, told reporters Thursday that "advances in science and technology," had eliminated any need for abortions to save the lives or health of women and said, "'Health of the mother' has become a tool for abortions anytime, for any reason." On Friday, he backed off the statement somewhat, saying there are "very rare circumstances" in which the procedure is necessary to save a woman's life.

The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists issued a statement saying: "Abortions are necessary in a number of circumstances to save the life of a woman or to preserve her health. Unfortunately, pregnancy is not a risk-free life event."

Conditions that might lead to ending a pregnancy to save a woman's life include severe infections, heart failure and severe cases of preeclampsia, a condition in which a woman develops very high blood pressure and is at risk for stroke, says Erika Levi, a obstetrician and gynecologist at the University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill.

"There are certain cases where ending the pregnancy is the only option, cases where it would be putting the mother's life at risk to continue the pregnancy," she says.

U.S. Rep. Joe Walsh, R-Ill., waits for the start of a televised debate against challenger Democrat Tammy Duckworth on Thursday in Chicago. (Photo: Charles Rex Arbogast, AP)

STORY: GOP rep backtracks on abortion comments

When a pregnancy must be ended before a fetus is viable, "the result is an abortion," says Vanessa Cullins, Vice President for External Medical Affairs for Planned Parenthood Federation of America. But she says there also are cases after viability in which an abortion is safer than an induced childbirth or surgical delivery.

Cecily Kellogg, 44, a writer who lives near Philadelphia, says that was the situation she faced when she was nearly six months pregnant with twin boys in 2004 and developed severe preeclampsia. One fetus had already died and "my liver had shut down, my kidneys had shut down and they were expecting me to start seizing at any minute," she says. The doctors said they had to quickly dilate her cervix and perform an abortion to save her. "I fought it," she says. "But they told me I would die — that it was either me and my son or just my son."

She says it was a "horrible experience," but the right thing to do. She and her husband had a daughter in 2006. Her story is at her blog.

The National Right to Life Committee would not elaborate on its brief statement saying abortions should be allowed if they are needed to save women's lives, said communications official Jessica Rogers. A more absolute view is expressed by the American Life League, a group opposing abortion which has a statement at its web site signed by 481 doctors who agree that: "There is never a situation in the law or in the ethical practice of medicine where a preborn child's life need be intentionally destroyed. ... A physician must do everything possible to save the lives of both of his patients, mother and child. He must never intend the death of either."

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-800-872-0001. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

Cassing Hammond, an associate professor of obstetrics and gynecology at Northwestern Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, says cases in which doctors must decide whether it is safe for a pregnant woman to deliver a fetus in a medical crisis are complex and outside the expertise of doctors who do not perform the procedures. He says he sees many such cases.

Most abortions are not for health reasons. The non-profit Guttmacher Institute says three-quarters of women having abortions say they can't afford a child, and an equal number say having a baby would interfere with work, school and the ability to care for others, including existing children. A study published in Guttmacher's International Family Planning Perspectives in 1998 said risk to a woman's health was the main reason for 2.8% of U.S. abortions in 1987-88.

Note: An earlier version of this story incorrectly referred to Cassing Hammond as "she." Hammond is male. We apologize for the error.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/RdhPqd