Definition of Human by Merriam-Webster
humans are the only mammals not endowed with a natural defense against the elements, such as fur or a thick hide

She is a very kind and human person.

Recent Examples on the Web: Adjective

The Moon Village must be able to sustain human life in an otherwise uninhabitable setting. Hadley Keller, House Beautiful, "Is This Inflatable City What Life Would Look Like on the Moon?," 11 Apr. 2019

What if others are experimenting with CRISPR in ways that threaten human life? Julia Belluz, Vox, "Is the CRISPR baby controversy the start of a terrifying new chapter in gene editing?," 22 Jan. 2019

And if the cost of human lives isn't enough to convince you, the 2015 study also found that firearm injuries result in $48 billion worth of hospital costs and work lost every year, the vast majority of which is attributed to fatal injuries. Korin Miller, SELF, "6 Reasons These Doctors Are So Outspoken About Gun Violence," 14 Nov. 2018

Is the danger worth bringing us closer to realizing the value of human life? Verge Staff, The Verge, "Smart scares for smart people," 31 Oct. 2018

While human error and irresponsibility are to be expected, Tesla explicitly states on its website that Autopilot should only be operated when the driver is fully attentive and ready to take over control at any time. Eric Stafford, Car and Driver, "Elon Musk Tweets Tacit Approval of Porn Video Shot in Tesla Model X on Autopilot," 10 May 2019

Chlorine is added to pools to kill bacteria, viruses and other things which may be harmful to the human body. Steven Macari, Harper's BAZAAR, "Could a Shower Filter Be the Missing Component to Your Wellness Routine?," 1 May 2019

Protein structure prediction, which tries to project the three-dimensional shape of proteins in the human body, is one of the most important problems in drug design. Irving Wladawsky-berger, WSJ, "AI for Molecular Design," 30 Apr. 2019

Those cannabinoids interact with the human body, specifically with what medical professionals call the endocannabinoid system — numerous receptors that bind with chemicals present in marijuana and affect the body and mind in different ways. Mary Emily O'hara, Allure, "Why People With Asthma Can Benefit From Edibles," 20 Apr. 2019

Recent Examples on the Web: Noun

Multiple cases of Canine Brucellosis, a bacterial disease that can be transmitted from dogs to humans and other animals, have been confirmed in Iowa by state veterinarian Dr. Jeff Kaisand. Elizabeth Gulino, House Beautiful, "Multiple Cases of a Disease That Can Be Transmitted From Dogs to Humans Are Confirmed in Iowa," 13 May 2019

May 2 is World Password Day, a chance for security companies to plead with lazy, careless humans to improve their password habits. Melissa Riofrio, PCWorld, "5 alarming facts in honor of World Password Day," 2 May 2019

Some canines are even more naturally empathetic to humans. Alexandra Gekas, Woman's Day, "9 Things Your Dog Is Trying to Tell You, According to Experts," 25 Feb. 2019

But these problems are, as seems to be true in 2018, about human error and incompetence, not any apparent incidents of voter fraud. German Lopez, Vox, "The Florida voter fraud allegations, explained," 12 Nov. 2018

But many people were buried there: Nearly 200 human remains have been recovered, some beneath buildings. Mark Barna, Discover Magazine, "When Farmers and Foragers First Met," 24 Oct. 2018

In the 2011 trial, experts testified that air samples indicated that decaying human remains had been present in Casey’s trunk. Fox News, "Casey Anthony's parents question what went wrong, who was to blame in new A&E special," 2 Oct. 2018

Three brothers read a story about building a kite that could lift a human being off the ground. Eric Johnson, Recode, "Making things is now a global movement. But is the U.S. making enough?," 27 Aug. 2018

The study suggested that increased methane emissions — added to the atmosphere by humans extracting and burning fossil fuels — have increased water vapor concentrations in the mesosphere by about 40 percent since the late 1800s. Katie Camero, BostonGlobe.com, "Once-rare cloud is now more common, and new study says climate change is to blame," 13 July 2018

These example sentences are selected automatically from various online news sources to reflect current usage of the word 'human.' Views expressed in the examples do not represent the opinion of Merriam-Webster or its editors. Send us feedback.