List of smoking bans in the United States
The following is a list of smoking bans in the United States. For smoking bans and restrictions outside the United States, see the worldwide list of smoking bans.

The United States Congress has not attempted to enact any type of nationwide federal smoking ban. Therefore, smoking bans in the United States are entirely a product of first-level jurisdictional, local criminal, and occupational safety and health laws.

In 1995, California was the first state to enact a statewide smoking ban; throughout the early to mid-2000s, especially between 2004 and 2007, an increasing number of states enacted a statewide smoking ban of some kind. As of July 2018, the most recent statewide smoking ban is Alaska's, which was signed into law on July 18, 2018, and went into effect on October 1, 2018.

As further detailed in this list, smoking laws vary widely throughout the United States. Some places in the United States do not generally regulate smoking at all, some ban smoking in certain areas and not others, and some ban smoking nearly everywhere, even in outdoor areas (no state bans smoking in all public outdoor areas, but some local jurisdictions do). As of July 1, 2017, according to the American Nonsmokers' Rights Foundation, 81.5% of the U.S. population lives under a ban on smoking in "workplaces, and/or restaurants, and/or bars, by either a state, commonwealth, or local law",[1] and 58.6% live under a ban covering all workplaces and restaurants and bars.[2] A smoking ban (either state or local) has been enacted covering all bars and restaurants in each of the 60 most populated cities in the United States except these 11: Atlanta, Jacksonville, Memphis, Miami, Las Vegas, Nashville, Oklahoma City, Philadelphia, Tampa, Tulsa, and Virginia Beach. New Hampshire allows smoking in some private member's clubs where alcohol is served.[3][4]

Overview [ edit ]

Statewide bans on smoking in all enclosed public places [ edit ]

As of July 2018, 26 states have enacted statewide bans on smoking in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants: Alaska, Arizona, California, Delaware, Hawaii, Illinois, Iowa, Kansas, Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan, Minnesota, Montana, Nebraska, North Dakota, New Jersey, New York, Ohio, Oregon, Rhode Island, South Dakota, Utah, Vermont, Washington, and Wisconsin. Twelve other states have enacted statewide smoking bans but have carved out an exception for certain establishments and workplaces: Colorado, Connecticut, Florida, Idaho, Indiana, Louisiana, Nevada, New Hampshire, New Mexico, North Carolina, Pennsylvania, and Tennessee.

However, these states exempt a variety of places from their respective smoking bans. All except seven (California, Delaware, Montana, North Dakota, Utah, Vermont, and Washington) exempt tobacconists. All except six (Alaska, Michigan, Indiana, North Dakota, Vermont, and Wisconsin) allow hotels and motels to designate a certain percentage of smoking rooms. Many also exempt or do not cover casinos (10), private clubs (8), cigar bars (14), or certain small workplaces (8). The following is a table of common exemptions from these 28 states' smoking bans:

States that exempt tobacconists States that exempt cigar bars States that exempt private clubs States that exempt casinos States that exempt small workplaces AK, AZ, CA, CO, CT, HI, KS, IL, IA, ME, MD, MA, MI, MN, NE, NJ, NM, NY, OH, OR, RI, SD, TN, WI AK, CA, CO, CT, MA, MI, NE, NJ, NM, NY, OR, RI, SD, TN, WI AK, AZ, CT, IA, KS, MA, NY, OH, TN CT, IA, KS, ME, TN (OTB parlors, beano and bingo halls), MI, MN, NJ (including OTB parlors), NM, RI (including OTB parlors), WI CO & TN (3 or fewer employees), CT (5 or fewer employees), ND (1 employee), NM (1 employee), OH (family owned and operated), UT (1 employee), VT (1 employee)

In Connecticut, Oregon, Montana, Utah, and Wisconsin, the state law preempts local governments from enacting stricter smoking bans than the state, though some cities and/or counties in some of those states have enacted local versions of the state's smoking ban. In the other 23 states with a statewide general smoking ban, some cities and/or counties have enacted stricter local smoking bans to varying degrees. In California, Connecticut, Delaware, Hawaii, Maine, New Jersey, North Dakota, Oregon, Utah, and Vermont, usage of e-cigarettes is prohibited indoors. The strictest smoking ban in the United States is in Calabasas, California, where smoking anywhere a non-smoker could congregate, including public sidewalks and apartment complexes, is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of at least $250.[5]

Statewide smoking bans exempting adult-only venues [ edit ]

As of July 2017, six states ban smoking in most enclosed public places, but permit adult venues such as bars (and casinos, if applicable) to allow smoking if they choose: Florida, Idaho, Indiana, Louisiana, Iowa and Nevada. In Florida, state law preempts local governments from enacting stricter smoking bans than the state, though in Idaho, Indiana, and Louisiana, some cities and/or counties have enacted stricter local smoking bans to varying degrees, in some cases banning it in all enclosed workplaces. See individual state listings below for details.

Unique statewide smoking bans [ edit ]

As of July 2018, 5 states have enacted smoking bans in particular places that do not fit in the other categories:

Alaska bans smoking in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants, but allows smoking in private clubs that were in existence prior to January 1, 2017, and allows for certain localities such as villages to opt out of the law bars (which can be 100% smoking) and small workplaces (which can have a designated smoking area); local governments in Idaho can regulate smoking more strictly than the state.

Nevada generally bans smoking in all public places and places of employment, but exempts bars, casinos, strip clubs, brothels, and retail tobacco stores, and restaurants that do not allow patrons under 21 years of age. In all other restaurants, smoking is relegated to separately ventilated designated smoking areas. Local governments in Nevada may regulate smoking more strictly than the state.

New Hampshire bans smoking in restaurants and some bars (those besides cigar bars and private clubs), schools, and certain common areas open to the public, but not anywhere else, and state law prohibits local governments from enacting local smoking bans.

North Carolina bans smoking in all restaurants and bars (excluding cigar bars and private clubs), as well as government buildings and vehicles, but does not regulate smoking anywhere else. Local governments may regulate smoking more strictly than the state, except in cigar bars, private clubs, tobacco shops, private residences/vehicles, designated hotel/motel smoking rooms, and theatrical performances involving smoking.

States with no statewide smoking ban [ edit ]

As of July 2018, 12 states have not enacted any general statewide ban on smoking in workplaces and/or bars and/or restaurants: Alabama, Arkansas, Georgia, Kentucky, Mississippi, Missouri, Oklahoma, South Carolina, Texas, Virginia, West Virginia, and Wyoming. Instead, laws in most of these states (see individual state listings below for further information) require proprietors of certain places to designate smoking and non-smoking areas and post warning signage.

In Oklahoma and Virginia state laws prohibit local governments from regulating smoking more strictly than the state, making those states among the fewest in the nation without any legislated smoking bans. In the other ten states, cities and/or counties have enacted stricter smoking laws than the state, in some cases banning smoking in all enclosed workplaces. In Alabama and Mississippi, the state smoking law expressly allows all local governments to do so. In Alaska, Kentucky, Missouri, South Carolina, Texas, and West Virginia, a court has ruled that certain local governments have the power to do so. See the individual state listings below for details.

Smoking laws and non-states [ edit ]

In the District of Columbia, American Samoa, Puerto Rico and the United States Virgin Islands, smoking is banned in all enclosed public places, including bars and restaurants. Guam prohibits smoking in restaurants, but the ban doesn't extend to workplaces or any other businesses. The Northern Mariana Islands prohibits smoking in most workplaces and restaurants, but not in bars.

Smoking laws and the U.S. federal government [ edit ]

Although Congress has not attempted to enact a general nationwide federal smoking ban in workplaces, several federal regulations do concern indoor smoking. Effective April 1998, inflight smoking is banned by the United States Department of Transportation on all commercial passenger flights in the United States, and/or by American air carriers.[6] This was long after Delta Air Lines had banned smoking on all of its flights. On August 9, 1997, President Bill Clinton issued Executive Order 13058, banning smoking in all interior spaces owned, rented, or leased by the Executive Branch of the Federal Government, as well as in any outdoor areas under executive branch control near air intake ducts.[7]

Smoking laws of the United States by state or territory [ edit ]

Alabama [ edit ]

Alaska [ edit ]

Statewide smoking ban: On October 1, 2018, after being signed into law on July 18, 2018, smoking was banned statewide in all enclosed public places, including bars, restaurants, private clubs, hotels/motels, outdoor arenas, playgrounds and parks. The law exempts (1) a vehicle that is a place of employment when the vehicle is used exclusively by one person, (2) on a vessel when the vessel is engaged in commercial fishing or sport charter fishing, (3) a private club if the private club has been in continuous operation at the same location since January 1, 2017; is not licensed to serve alcoholic beverages; and is not a place of employment, (4) at a private residence, except a private residence described in (b) of 27 section or while a health care provider is present, (5) in a stand-alone shelter if the stand-alone shelter meets the following requirements: food or drink may not be sold or served in the stand-alone shelter; and the stand-alone shelter meets the minimum distance requirements of 10 feet (3.0 m), and (6) allows smoking so long as it's not within 10 feet (3.0 m) of all places where smoking is prohibited. Localities may regulating smoking more stringently than the state, and the bill also allows for certain municipalities such as villages to exempt certain establishments, including bars and restaurants from the bill if they see fit.[17][18]

American Samoa [ edit ]

Territory-wide smoking ban. On October 20, 2010 Governor Togiola Tulafono signed into law the American Samoa Smoke Free Environment Act, a Fono (Legislature) bill passed earlier in the year. The bill went into effect on January 20, 2011.[19]

Arizona [ edit ]

Statewide smoking ban: On May 1, 2007, the Smoke Free Arizona Act (Proposition 201) went into effect after passage by 54.7% of voters the prior November, banning smoking in all enclosed workplaces and within 20 feet (6.1 m) of an entrance or exit of such a place, including bars and restaurants, only exempting private residences, retail tobacco stores, private clubs, smoking associated with American Indian religious ceremonies, outdoor patios, and stage/film/television performances; local governments may enact stricter regulations than the state. The law does not cover businesses located on Indian Reservations, as the reservations are sovereign nations.[20][21][22]

Arkansas [ edit ]

No statewide smoking ban. Instead, Arkansas's statewide smoking law, the Arkansas Clean Indoor Air Act of 2006, bans smoking in most enclosed workplaces in Arkansas, exempting private residences, hotel and motel rooms designated as smoking rooms, workplaces with fewer than three employees, retail tobacco stores, designated areas in nursing homes, outdoor areas, workplaces of tobacco manufacturers (and importers and wholesalers), bars and restaurants that do not allow patrons younger than 21, and gaming floors of operations regulated by the Arkansas Racing Commission. [23] Local governments may regulate smoking more stringently than the state law. [24] At the same time, the Arkansas Protection from Secondhand Smoke for Children Act of 2006 went into effect, prohibiting smoking in a motor vehicle carrying a child under age six years old who weighs less than 60 pounds and is in a car seat. [25]

Instead, Arkansas's statewide smoking law, the Arkansas Clean Indoor Air Act of 2006, bans smoking in most enclosed workplaces in Arkansas, exempting private residences, hotel and motel rooms designated as smoking rooms, workplaces with fewer than three employees, retail tobacco stores, designated areas in nursing homes, outdoor areas, workplaces of tobacco manufacturers (and importers and wholesalers), bars and restaurants that do not allow patrons younger than 21, and gaming floors of operations regulated by the Arkansas Racing Commission. Local governments may regulate smoking more stringently than the state law. At the same time, the Arkansas Protection from Secondhand Smoke for Children Act of 2006 went into effect, prohibiting smoking in a motor vehicle carrying a child under age six years old who weighs less than 60 pounds and is in a car seat. Localities in Arkansas with smoking bans that include all bars and restaurants (3 total): Fairfield Bay, January 29, 2006, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants [4] Helena-West Helena, November 7, 2008 banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants [4] Wooster, May 26, 2016 banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants [4]

Localities in Arkansas with smoking bans that do not include all bars and restaurants (3 total): Fayetteville, March 11, 2004, banned in all restaurants, but not bars or other enclosed workplaces [4] Highfill, July 12, 2003, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including restaurants but exempting bars [4] Pine Bluff, July 7, 2005, banned in all restaurants, but not bars or other enclosed workplaces [4]



California [ edit ]

Statewide smoking ban: Since January 1, 1995, smoking has been banned in all enclosed workplaces in California, including bars and restaurants (bars were excluded until January 1, 1998); these following areas were exempt until June 9, 2016: meeting and banquet rooms except while food or beverage functions are taking place (including set-up, service, and clean-up activities or when the room is being used for exhibit activities), retail or wholesale tobacco shops and private smokers lounges (i.e. cigar bars), truck cabs/tractors if no nonsmoking employees are present, theatrical production sites if smoking is an integral part of the story, medical research or treatment sites if smoking is integral to the research or treatment being conducted, private residences except homes licensed as family day care homes during the hours of operation and in those areas where children are present, and patient smoking areas in long-term health care facilities.[26]

Effective January 1, 2004, California bill AB846 bans smoking within 20 feet (6.1 m) of the entrance or operable window of a public building ("public building" means a building owned and occupied, or leased and occupied, by the state, a county, a city, a city and county, or a California Community College district.) The law also prohibits smoking in state owned vehicles.[27][28]

Additionally, effective January 1, 2008, smoking in a moving vehicle while in the presence of a minor (18 years or younger) is an infraction; the charge is not serious enough to be pulled over, and only can be cited along with a stricter offense, such as a moving violation or traffic accident.[29][30]

Local jurisdictions may regulate smoking more strictly than the state. Many California communities have established smoke-free registries for private residential apartment buildings, which range from complexes where smoking is entirely prohibited (whether inside private dwellings or outside) to those where certain sections of dwellings may be designated as smoking dwellings. Most California cities allow landlords to regulate smoking at will.

In 2012, the California Legislature passed the following into law, California Civil Code Section 1947.5. (a) A landlord of a residential dwelling unit, as defined in Section 1940, or his or her agent, may prohibit the smoking of a cigarette, as defined in Section 104556 of the Health and Safety Code, or other tobacco product on the property or in any building or portion of the building, including any dwelling unit, other interior or exterior area, or the premises on which it is located, in accordance with this article. (b) (1) Every lease or rental agreement entered into on or after January 1, 2012, for a residential dwelling unit on property on any portion of which the landlord has prohibited the smoking of cigarettes or other tobacco products pursuant to this article shall include a provision that specifies the areas on the property where smoking is prohibited, if the lessee has not previously occupied the dwelling unit. (2) For a lease or rental agreement entered into before January 1, 2012, a prohibition against the smoking of cigarettes or other tobacco products in any portion of the property in which smoking was previously permitted shall constitute a change of the terms of tenancy, requiring adequate notice in writing, to be provided in the manner prescribed in Section 827. (c) A landlord who exercises the authority provided in subdivision (a) to prohibit smoking shall be subject to federal, state, and local requirements governing changes to the terms of a lease or rental agreement for tenants with leases or rental agreements that are in existence at the time that the policy limiting or prohibiting smoking is adopted. (d) This section shall not be construed to preempt any local ordinance in effect on or before January 1, 2012, or any provision of a local ordinance in effect on or after January 1, 2012, that restricts the smoking of cigarettes or other tobacco products. (e) A limitation or prohibition of the use of any tobacco product shall not affect any other term or condition of the tenancy, nor shall this section be construed to require statutory authority to establish or enforce any other lawful term or condition of the tenancy. (Added by Stats. 2011, Ch. 264, Sec. 2. Effective January 1, 2012.) [61]

Colorado [ edit ]

Statewide smoking ban: On July 1, 2006, the Colorado Clean Indoor Air Act went into effect, banning smoking in all enclosed workplaces statewide, including bars and restaurants. Casinos, initially exempt, were added to the ban January 1, 2008.[62] The Act only exempts private residences and automobiles unless used for the public transportation of children or as part of healthcare or daycare, limousines under private hire, hotel/motel rooms designated as smoking rooms, retail tobacco stores, cigar bars, designated areas in airports, outdoor areas, workplaces not open to the public where the employer employs three or fewer employees, private nonresidential buildings on a farm or ranch that has annual gross income of less than $500,000, and designated areas in nursing homes.[63] Local governments may regulate smoking more strictly than the state.[64] A judge has ruled that a bar sharing common indoor space with a tobacco shop is also exempt from the ban.[65]

Connecticut [ edit ]

Statewide smoking ban: On October 1, 2003, the Clean Indoor Air Act went into effect, banning smoking statewide in all enclosed workplaces in Connecticut, including bars and restaurants (bars, cafes, and bowling alleys were exempt until April 1, 2004.[66] The Act exempts correctional and psychiatric facilities, public housing projects, private clubs whose liquor permit was issued on or before May 1, 2003, areas of businesses where tobacco products are developed and tested, and cigar bars (a business that has a liquor permit and generated at least 10% of its 2002 gross income from on-site sales of tobacco products or humidor rentals and has not changed its size or location after December 31, 2002).[66] If a business has five or fewer employees (except bars and restaurants), the employer and all employees can agree to designate 20% of the place's enclosed space as a smoking area, provided that it is separately ventilated and adequate breakroom space for nonsmokers is allocated.[66] Local governments are preempted from regulating smoking at all.[66] Smoking is also permitted in hotel rooms but must be designated.

Two large casinos on Mohegan and Mashantucket Pequot tribal land, Mohegan Sun and Foxwoods, allow smoking in many areas of their properties. Employers may also designate an on-site designated smoking area for employees.

Delaware [ edit ]

Statewide smoking ban: On November 1, 2002, the Clean Indoor Air Act went into effect, banning smoking statewide in all enclosed workplaces in Delaware, including bars, restaurants, and casinos.[67] The Act exempts private homes and automobiles not used for childcare or daycare or the public transportation of children, rented social halls while being rented, limousines under private hire, hotel/motel rooms designated as smoking rooms, fundraising activities sponsored by an ambulance or fire company while on property owned or leased by the company, and fundraising activities sponsored by a fraternal benefit society taking place upon property owned or leased by the society.[67] Local governments can regulate smoking more strictly than the state. Bethany Beach has outlawed smoking on the boardwalk and beach.[4][67] In Rehoboth Beach, smoking is banned in parks, playgrounds, the beach, the boardwalk, and adjacent public areas.[68][69]

District of Columbia [ edit ]

District-wide smoking ban: Effective January 2007, smoking is banned in bars, restaurants, and other public places in the District of Columbia; exempts outdoor areas, designated hotel/motel rooms, retail tobacco stores, cigar bars, hookah bars, and businesses that can show they receive 10% or more of their annual revenue from tobacco sales, excluding cigarette machines.[70]

Florida [ edit ]

Statewide smoking ban excluding bars: On July 1, 2003, a constitutional amendment passed by voters came into effect which banned smoking statewide in all enclosed workplaces in Florida, exempting private residences, retail tobacco shops, designated smoking rooms in hotels/motels, stand-alone bars with no more than 10% of revenue from food sales, rooms used for quit-smoking programs and medical research, and designated smoking areas in customs transit areas under the authority of the U.S. Department of Homeland Security.[71] Local governments are preempted from regulating smoking.[72][73]

Georgia [ edit ]

Guam [ edit ]

Territory-wide ban on smoking in restaurants only: On February 6, 2007, the Natasha Protection Act went into effect after the Supreme Court of Guam lifted an injunction on it, banning smoking in all restaurants, as well as in bars that double as restaurants between 4:00 am and 10:00 pm; the ban does not cover either stand-alone bars or workplaces in general.[78] In 2009, a new act went into effect, additionally banning smoking within 20 feet of public buildings.[79]

Hawaii [ edit ]

Statewide smoking ban : On November 16, 2006, smoking was banned statewide in all enclosed or partially enclosed workplaces in Hawaii, including the indoor and outdoor portions of all bars and restaurants. [80] The law exempts private residences not used as a healthcare or daycare facility, hotel/motel rooms designated as smoking rooms, retail tobacco stores, designated rooms in nursing homes, outdoor places of employment not part of bars or restaurants, any place where smoking is part of a production being filmed, and state correctional facilities. [81] Smoking is prohibited within 20 feet (6.1 m) of the entrance/exit of a place where the law prohibits smoking indoors. [82] Fines range from $50 for a person caught smoking in violation of the law, to between $100 and $500 for an establishment caught allowing smoking in violation of the law. [83] In 2010, several bills were introduced attempting to exempt bars. [84] Counties may regulate smoking more strictly than the state. [85]

: On November 16, 2006, smoking was banned statewide in all enclosed or partially enclosed workplaces in Hawaii, including the indoor and outdoor portions of all bars and restaurants. The law exempts private residences not used as a healthcare or daycare facility, hotel/motel rooms designated as smoking rooms, retail tobacco stores, designated rooms in nursing homes, outdoor places of employment not part of bars or restaurants, any place where smoking is part of a production being filmed, and state correctional facilities. Smoking is prohibited within 20 feet (6.1 m) of the entrance/exit of a place where the law prohibits smoking indoors. Fines range from $50 for a person caught smoking in violation of the law, to between $100 and $500 for an establishment caught allowing smoking in violation of the law. In 2010, several bills were introduced attempting to exempt bars. Counties may regulate smoking more strictly than the state. Kalawao County, October 4, 2002, banned smoking in all public buildings. [86] The ban did not apply to private homes or Kalawao County's only bar at the time. [86]

The ban did not apply to private homes or Kalawao County's only bar at the time. Hawaii County, March 13, 2008, banned in public recreational areas, such as parks and beaches.[ citation needed ]

Idaho [ edit ]

Statewide ban on smoking in restaurants and some workplaces : On July 1, 2004, the Clean Indoor Air Act went into effect, banning smoking statewide in all enclosed public places, except in bars, retail tobacco stores, private clubs, designated smoking rooms in hotels/motels, theatrical productions, areas of owner-operated businesses with no employees besides the owner not open to the general public, offices (other than childcare facilities) within private homes, veterans homes, and designated breakrooms in businesses with fewer than five employees (as long as they are separately ventilated and minors are not allowed in that room). [87] Local governments may regulate smoking more strictly than the state. [88]

: On July 1, 2004, the Clean Indoor Air Act went into effect, banning smoking statewide in all enclosed public places, except in bars, retail tobacco stores, private clubs, designated smoking rooms in hotels/motels, theatrical productions, areas of owner-operated businesses with no employees besides the owner not open to the general public, offices (other than childcare facilities) within private homes, veterans homes, and designated breakrooms in businesses with fewer than five employees (as long as they are separately ventilated and minors are not allowed in that room). Local governments may regulate smoking more strictly than the state. Boise, January 2, 2012, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and private clubs, as well as in any public outdoor space accessible to children and in all spaces owned by the public, including parks. [89]

Moscow, August 4, 2009, banned in bars and private clubs, but not other workplaces [4]

Ketchum, April 15, 2013, banned in a long list of areas that include all bars, city-owned facilities, parks, and indoor public places and places of employment, including hotel and motel rooms.[90]

Illinois [ edit ]

Statewide smoking ban: On January 1, 2008, the Smoke Free Illinois Act went into effect, banning smoking in all enclosed workplaces, including bars, restaurants, and casinos, and within 15 feet (4.6 m) of such places; exempts certain retail tobacco stores, private and semiprivate rooms in nursing homes occupied exclusively by smokers, no more than 25% of designated smoking rooms in hotels/motels on the same floor, and private residences.[91] Smoking is prohibited in private residences when defined as a place of employment such as when used for child care or foster care.[91] Local governments may regulate smoking more strictly than the state.[91]

HB 1310: a proposal in January 2012 to once again permit smoking in bars, casinos, adult entertainment venues, and private clubs failed in the Illinois House 30-82.

Chicago has had its own Clean Indoor Air Ordinance since 1988.[92] The Chicago Clean Indoor Air Act was updated to mention e-cigarettes in 2014, making it the first major U.S. city to legislate e-cigarette use.[93] The Chicago Park District's Board of Commissioners has discussed banning all forms of smoking in Chicago parks, beaches, play lots and other facilities, but there is not yet a municipal ordinance.

As of January 1, 2018, the minimum legal age to purchase tobacco products and e-cigarettes in unincorporated areas of Lake County, Illinois is 21 years.[94]

Indiana [ edit ]

Iowa [ edit ]

Statewide smoking ban: On July 1, 2008, the Iowa Smokefree Air Act went into effect, banning smoking statewide in all workplaces in Iowa, including bars and restaurants, as well as the outdoor areas of schools, stadia, restaurants, and public transit areas (including bus shelters).[109] The Act does not legislate smoking in public parks.[110] The Act exempts private residences while not being used as a childcare or healthcare facility, outdoor areas where smoking is not specifically prohibited, hotel/motel rooms designated as smoking rooms, retail tobacco stores, private and semiprivate rooms in nursing homes occupied by smokers, private clubs, limousines under private hire, private work vehicles where only one employee is located, places where a quit-smoking program is taking place, farm vehicles, casino gaming floors, the state-run veterans' home in Marshalltown, and designated areas of correctional facilities.[111] Fines for individuals found in violation of the Smokefree Air Act are $50 per violation.[112] Fines for businesses range anywhere from $100 to $500 for each violation with the eventual possibility of revocation of liquor and/or business license for habitually offending businesses.[112]

Kansas [ edit ]

Statewide smoking ban: On July 1, 2010, after being signed into law by Governor Mark Parkinson on March 12, 2010, an amendment to Kansas' 1987 statewide smoking law took effect, banning smoking statewide in all enclosed, indoor workplaces in Kansas.[113] The law will exempt only (1) casino and racetrack gaming floors, (2) the entire area of a private club that was in existence on January 1, 2009, (3) designated areas in any private club where persons under 18 are prohibited, (4) tobacconists, (5) designated hotel and motel smoking rooms, (6) designated smoking areas in nursing homes and healthcare facilities, (7) and all outdoor areas, unless within a 10' radius of an entryway to a public building.[113] The amendment will not change the original law's provision allowing local governments to regulate smoking more stringently than the state,[113][114] which the Kansas Supreme Court reiterated in 2007 upon a bar owner's challenge to Lawrence's local smoking ban.[115] On June 30, 2010, the District Court of Shawnee County, Kansas, issued a preliminary injunction prohibiting the statewide smoking ban from taking effect in 31 private clubs established after January 1, 2009, until it settles a lawsuit against the state by those clubs.[116]

Kentucky [ edit ]

Louisiana [ edit ]

Maine [ edit ]

Statewide smoking ban: Effective January 1, 2004, laws from 1985 and 1999 were expanded such that smoking is banned statewide in all workplaces and public places in Maine, including bars and restaurants.[135] The law exempts places open to the public during hours when it is closed, stage performances involving smoking, smoking for religious rituals, factories where labor unions have contracted to have smoking areas, designated areas in hospitals, designated hotel/motel smoking rooms, private residences except when used as a childcare or healthcare facility, beano and bingo halls, tobacco specialty stores, and off-track betting parlors that were in existence on June 30, 2003.[135] The state law exempts private clubs (Elks, American Legion, VFW etc.) under certain conditions. The state law is silent as to whether local governments may regulate smoking more strictly than the state, though as of April 2009 no local government in Maine has done so.[4] Effective September 1, 2008, smoking is banned in any car when a person under the age of 16 is present, though no driver may be pulled over or searched solely for violation of this law.[136]

Maryland [ edit ]

Statewide smoking ban: On February 1, 2008, the Maryland Clean Indoor Air Act of 2007 went into effect, banning smoking in all public transportation vehicles, enclosed public places, and enclosed workplaces, including bars, restaurants, casinos, and private clubs.[137] The Act exempts private residences and vehicles while not being used as a childcare or healthcare facility, designated hotel/motel smoking rooms, retail tobacco stores, cigar lounges and hookah bars, other tobacco-related workplaces such as importers and distributors, facilities where smoking research is conducted, psychiatric facilities, long-term care facilities, hospitals where a doctor has authorized a patient to smoke, and any business that has applied for and received a waiver allowing smoking (though all waivers expired on January 1, 2011).[137] Local governments may regulate smoking more strictly than the state, though not less strictly.[137]

Massachusetts [ edit ]

Statewide smoking ban : Effective July 1, 2004, smoking is banned in all enclosed public places and workplaces, including bars and restaurants. [138] The law exempts private clubs when not open to the public, private residences except when used as a business for healthcare or childcare, designated hotel/motel smoking rooms, retail tobacco stores, licensed cigar or hookah bars, stage performances involving smoking, places where smoking-related scientific research is occurring, religious ceremonies involving smoking, outdoor areas, designated areas in nursing homes as approved by the state, and other tobacco-related workplaces such as farms and distributors. [138] Local governments and boards of health may regulate smoking more strictly than the state. [138]

: Effective July 1, 2004, smoking is banned in all enclosed public places and workplaces, including bars and restaurants. The law exempts private clubs when not open to the public, private residences except when used as a business for healthcare or childcare, designated hotel/motel smoking rooms, retail tobacco stores, licensed cigar or hookah bars, stage performances involving smoking, places where smoking-related scientific research is occurring, religious ceremonies involving smoking, outdoor areas, designated areas in nursing homes as approved by the state, and other tobacco-related workplaces such as farms and distributors. Local governments and boards of health may regulate smoking more strictly than the state. Boston, February 9, 2009, banned by the Boston Public Health Commission on outside patios of bars and restaurants; also banned on February 9, 2019 (10 years later than the other new restrictions) in cigar and hookah bars, unless the establishment obtains an additional 10-year exemption. Additionally, smoking is banned in all hotel rooms in the city of Boston. Tobacco products can not be sold at educational institutions or health care institutions including pharmacies and stores having pharmacies within.[139][140][141][142]

Michigan [ edit ]

Statewide smoking ban: On May 1, 2010, after being signed into law by Governor Jennifer Granholm on December 18, 2009, the Dr. Ron Davis Law took effect, banning smoking statewide in all enclosed, indoor workplaces in Michigan, as well as the outdoor patios of bars and restaurants.[143][144] The law exempts only cigar bars, retail tobacco stores, private home offices, company vehicles including commercial trucks, and Detroit's three casinos' gambling floors.[143] The law is silent as to whether local governments may regulate smoking more strictly than the state, though it prohibits state or local health departments from enacting any smoking rules different than the law.[143]

Minnesota [ edit ]

Statewide smoking ban : On October 1, 2007, the Freedom to Breathe Act went into effect, expanding the existing Clean Indoor Air Act of 1975 so as to ban smoking statewide in all enclosed workplaces in Minnesota, including public transportation, bars, and restaurants. [145] The Act exempts designated rooms in nursing homes, designated areas in psychiatric facilities, places where scientific studies related to smoking occur, private homes and residences not in use as a place of employment, designated hotel/motel smoking rooms, retail tobacco shops, heavy commercial vehicles, farm vehicles and construction equipment, buildings on family farms, the Minnesota disabled veterans' rest camp, smoking by American Indians as part of a traditional spiritual or cultural ceremony, stage performances involving smoking, and outdoor areas. [146] Local governments may regulate smoking more stringently than the state. [147]

: On October 1, 2007, the Freedom to Breathe Act went into effect, expanding the existing Clean Indoor Air Act of 1975 so as to ban smoking statewide in all enclosed workplaces in Minnesota, including public transportation, bars, and restaurants. The Act exempts designated rooms in nursing homes, designated areas in psychiatric facilities, places where scientific studies related to smoking occur, private homes and residences not in use as a place of employment, designated hotel/motel smoking rooms, retail tobacco shops, heavy commercial vehicles, farm vehicles and construction equipment, buildings on family farms, the Minnesota disabled veterans' rest camp, smoking by American Indians as part of a traditional spiritual or cultural ceremony, stage performances involving smoking, and outdoor areas. Local governments may regulate smoking more stringently than the state. Carlton County, June 1, 2007, banned on 50% of outdoor patio seating in bars and restaurants. [ citation needed ]

Duluth, March 7, 2010, banned within 15 feet (4.6 m) of a bus shelter or transit center. [148]

Golden Valley, March 31, 2009, banned within 25 feet (7.6 m) of entrances, exits, and ventilation openings of all areas of bars and restaurants; also in public parks and recreational facilities. [ citation needed ]

Rochester, June 2010 Downtown smoke-free zone includes the block of Second Avenue Southwest between Gonda and the Kahler, and the two-block pedestrian mall known as the Peace Plaza. The zone was extended in June 2010 to include two blocks of West Center Street between the Kahler Grand Hotel, Methodist Hospital and the Gonda Building.[149]

Mississippi [ edit ]

Missouri [ edit ]

Montana [ edit ]

Statewide smoking ban: On October 1, 2005, the Montana Clean Indoor Air Act (MCIAA) went into effect, banning smoking statewide in all enclosed workplaces in Montana including restaurants, though bars were exempt until October 1, 2009;[271] the word "bar" is defined in the Act as also including taverns, night clubs, cocktail lounges, and casinos.[272] The act exempts private residences not used as a daycare facility or healthcare facility, private motor vehicles, tobacco demonstrations in schools, designated hotel/motel smoking rooms, and American Indian religious and cultural activities.[271] Local governments are preempted from regulating smoking more stringently than the Act.[273]

Nebraska [ edit ]

Statewide smoking ban: On June 1, 2009, the Nebraska Clean Indoor Air Act passed in February 2008 went into effect, banning smoking statewide in all enclosed workplaces in Nebraska, including all bars and restaurants.[274] The Act exempts tobacco retail stores, designated hotel/motel smoking rooms, private residences, and places where scientific research about smoking is occurring.[275] In April 2009, the Act was amended to further exempt cigar bars, as well.[276] Local governments may regulate smoking more stringently than the Act.[277]

Nevada [ edit ]

Statewide smoking ban excluding bars, casinos, and designated restaurant smoking rooms: On December 8, 2006, after passage by 54% of voters on November 7, 2006, the Nevada Clean Indoor Air Act went into effect, banning smoking statewide in all enclosed workplaces. The act passed by voters initially included all restaurants as well as bars that serve food.[278] The Act permits smoking without limitation in areas within casinos where minors are already prohibited, stand-alone bars that do not serve food, strip clubs and brothels, retail tobacco stores, and private residences (including those that serve as an office workplace, unless used as a childcare, adult daycare, or healthcare facility).[278] Local governments may regulate smoking more stringently than the Act,[278] though no city or county in Nevada has chosen to do so.[4] In 2009 Nevada partially repealed the ban to allow smoking in tobacco-related trade conventions.[ citation needed ] The ban was further amended in 2011 to allow smoking in taverns that serve alcohol and food as long as patrons under 21 are not allowed in. Smoking is also now allowed in designated areas of family restaurants if the smoking area is physically enclosed and separated from the non-smoking area and minors are prohibited inside.[ citation needed ]

New Hampshire [ edit ]

Statewide ban on smoking in bars, restaurants, and some other workplaces: On September 17, 2007, the Indoor Smoking Act went into effect, banning smoking in schools, child daycare facilities, hospitals, grocery stores, elevators and public conveyances (except when rented for private purposes), restaurants, bars, and private clubs when open to the public.[279] Private clubs and religious and fraternal organizations (including bars and restaurants inside these places), hotel and motel rooms, rented halls and rooms under control of the renter, college dormitory rooms, public housing, nursing homes, areas designated by hospitals, and alcohol/drug rehabilitation facilities are exempt from smoking regulation and can allow smoking indoors freely.[280] All other places must designate smoking and nonsmoking areas and post appropriate signs.[281] On January 1, 2010, House Bill 392 went into effect. It established an on-premises cigar, beverage, and liquor license and allowed for cigar smoking at public cigar bars.[282] Towns only can regulate smoking more strictly with regard to fire safety and sanitation.[283] In 2003, the New Hampshire Supreme Court ruled that this means state law preempts towns from enacting stricter local smoking bans for health reasons.[284]

New Jersey [ edit ]

Statewide smoking ban : On April 15, 2006, the New Jersey Smoke-Free Air Act went into effect, city park and beaches banning smoking statewide in all enclosed workplaces in New Jersey, including all bars and restaurants, strip clubs, hospitals, psychiatric facilities, as well as outside portions of school grounds. [285] The Act exempts cigar bars, tobacco retail stores, tobacco manufacturing facilities, private residences and private automobiles, off-track betting parlors, and designated hotel/motel smoking rooms. [286] Local governments may regulate smoking more stringently than the Act. [287] On January 16, 2019, smoking was outlawed on all public beaches and in state parks. [288] Violating the Act can result in a fine of between $250 and $1,000, depending how many violations one has incurred within a year. [289]

: On April 15, 2006, the New Jersey Smoke-Free Air Act went into effect, city park and beaches banning smoking statewide in all enclosed workplaces in New Jersey, including all bars and restaurants, strip clubs, hospitals, psychiatric facilities, as well as outside portions of school grounds. The Act exempts cigar bars, tobacco retail stores, tobacco manufacturing facilities, private residences and private automobiles, off-track betting parlors, and designated hotel/motel smoking rooms. Local governments may regulate smoking more stringently than the Act. On January 16, 2019, smoking was outlawed on all public beaches and in state parks. Violating the Act can result in a fine of between $250 and $1,000, depending how many violations one has incurred within a year. Atlantic City, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants [4] as well as 75% of casino gaming floors. [290]

as well as 75% of casino gaming floors. Pequannock, banned in public parks with ball-fields or playgrounds in July 2011 through ordinance introduced by Mayor Rich Phelan.[291]

New Mexico [ edit ]

Statewide smoking ban: On June 15, 2007, the Dee Johnson Clean Indoor Air Act went into effect, banning smoking statewide in all enclosed workplaces in New Mexico, including all bars and restaurants, as well as within a "reasonable distance" of the entrances to those places.[292][293] The Act exempts (1) private residences except when being used to provide commercial childcare, adult care, and/or healthcare, (2) retail tobacco stores, (3) cigar bars, (4) tobacco manufacturing facilities, (5) casinos, (6) quit-smoking programs, (7) designated outdoor smoking areas, (8) private clubs, (9) limousines under private hire, (10) designated hotel/motel smoking rooms, (11) enclosed areas within restaurants, bars, and hotel/motel conference/meeting rooms that are being used for private functions, (12) cultural or ceremonial activities by American Indians, (13) non-bar/restaurant businesses with fewer than two employees that is not usually accessible to the public and all employees agree to allow smoking, and (14) stage, motion picture, or television productions involving smoking as part of the production.[294] Penalties are $100 for a first violation, $200 for a second violation within 12 months and $500 for the third and subsequent violations.[295] Local governments may regulate smoking more stringently than the Act.[296] UNM campuses are tobacco-free as of August 2009.[297]

New York [ edit ]

Statewide smoking ban : Effective July 24, 2003, [298] smoking is banned statewide in all enclosed workplaces in New York, including all bars and restaurants and construction sites. [299] The law exempts (1) private homes and automobiles, (2) hotel/motel rooms, (3) retail tobacco businesses, (4) private clubs, (5) cigar bars (A cigar bar that makes 10 percent of its gross income from the on-site sale of tobacco products and the rental of on-site humidors, not including vending machines sales are exempt from the ban), (6) outdoor areas of bars and restaurants, and (7) enclosed rooms in restaurants, bars, convention halls, etc., when hosting private functions organized for the promotion and sampling of tobacco products. [300] Local governments may regulate smoking more stringently than the state law. [301] Breaking the state law can result in a fine of between $200 and $2,000, depending how many violations one has had within a year. [300] Albany, On January 1, 2015, the following ordinance took effect. "No person shall smoke within the City's parks, sport fields, swimming pools, or playgrounds. For purposes of this section, to 'smoke' means to burn a lighted cigar, cigarette, or pipe or to use any other substance which contains tobacco." [302] Great Neck, Adopted January 4, 2011, smoking was banned on sidewalks in front of commercial buildings, Village Green park, and the Housing Authority. [303] New York City, From May 18, 2014 everyone under the age of 21 was banned from buying cigarettes, tobacco products and e-cigarettes. [304] Effective May 23, 2011, smoking was banned in all parks, boardwalks, beaches, recreation centers, swimming pools and pedestrian plazas. [305] On March 30, 2003, smoking was banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants; exempts tobacco bars, owner-operated bars, separately ventilated smoking rooms in bars, private clubs with no employees, private functions organized for the promotion and sampling of tobacco products, and retail tobacco shops. [306] Shortly after, on July 24, 2003, the statewide smoking ban came into effect. New York City may suspend or revoke a business's license if it has been found guilty of violating this law three times within 12 months. [307]

: Effective July 24, 2003, smoking is banned statewide in all enclosed workplaces in New York, including all bars and restaurants and construction sites. The law exempts (1) private homes and automobiles, (2) hotel/motel rooms, (3) retail tobacco businesses, (4) private clubs, (5) cigar bars (A cigar bar that makes 10 percent of its gross income from the on-site sale of tobacco products and the rental of on-site humidors, not including vending machines sales are exempt from the ban), (6) outdoor areas of bars and restaurants, and (7) enclosed rooms in restaurants, bars, convention halls, etc., when hosting private functions organized for the promotion and sampling of tobacco products. Local governments may regulate smoking more stringently than the state law. Breaking the state law can result in a fine of between $200 and $2,000, depending how many violations one has had within a year.

On January 21, 1908, the New York City Council had passed the Sullivan Ordinance, which would have banned women from smoking anywhere except their homes, but was vetoed by the Mayor within two weeks of its passage.

North Carolina [ edit ]

North Dakota [ edit ]

Statewide smoking ban : On November 6, 2012, by a vote of 66%-34%, North Dakota voters ratified Initiative Measure Four, which, upon taking effect in December 2012, amends North Dakota's existing partial smoking ban so as to ban smoking statewide in all enclosed public places and places of employment, including all bars, restaurants, and tobacco stores. [313] [314] The ban exempts only (1) private residences except when operating as a childcare or adult day care facility, (2) outdoor areas except within 20 feet of the entrance to a public place or place of employment, (3) businesses not open to the public with no employees besides the owner, and (4) American Indian religious and cultural rituals. [314] Local governments may regulate smoking more stringently than the state. [314] As noted above, North Dakota is one of only six states that ban smoking in tobacco stores and is one of only four that prohibit hotels and motels from designating a certain percentage of rooms for smoking. North Dakota State University, 2008, banned outdoors on campus within 50 feet (15 m) of buildings. [ citation needed ] University of North Dakota, Grand Forks, October 5, 2007, banned anywhere on campus grounds [315]

: On November 6, 2012, by a vote of 66%-34%, North Dakota voters ratified Initiative Measure Four, which, upon taking effect in December 2012, amends North Dakota's existing partial smoking ban so as to ban smoking statewide in all enclosed public places and places of employment, including all bars, restaurants, and tobacco stores. The ban exempts only (1) private residences except when operating as a childcare or adult day care facility, (2) outdoor areas except within 20 feet of the entrance to a public place or place of employment, (3) businesses not open to the public with no employees besides the owner, and (4) American Indian religious and cultural rituals. Local governments may regulate smoking more stringently than the state. As noted above, North Dakota is one of only six states that ban smoking in tobacco stores and is one of only four that prohibit hotels and motels from designating a certain percentage of rooms for smoking.

Northern Mariana Islands [ edit ]

Partial territory-wide smoking ban. Since September 29, 2009, smoking has been banned for most workplaces and restaurants, but not bars.[316]

Ohio [ edit ]

Statewide smoking ban : On December 7, 2006, after passage by Ohio voters on November 7, 2006, Chapter 3794 (titled "Smoking Ban") of the Ohio Revised Code went into effect, banning smoking statewide in all enclosed workplaces in Ohio, including bars and restaurants. [317] The law exempts (1) private residences except when being used as a business when employees other than the owner are present, (2) designated hotel/motel smoking rooms, (3) family-owned and operated businesses not open to the public where all employees are related to the owner, (4) designated smoking areas in nursing homes, (5) retail tobacco stores, (6) outdoor patios, (7) private clubs with no employees. [317] The law is enforced by the Ohio Department of Health, which began enforcement on May 3, 2007. [317] A business may be fined up to $2,500 and individuals $100 for violation of the ban. [317] Local governments may regulate smoking more stringently than the state. [317]

: On December 7, 2006, after passage by Ohio voters on November 7, 2006, Chapter 3794 (titled "Smoking Ban") of the Ohio Revised Code went into effect, banning smoking statewide in all enclosed workplaces in Ohio, including bars and restaurants. The law exempts (1) private residences except when being used as a business when employees other than the owner are present, (2) designated hotel/motel smoking rooms, (3) family-owned and operated businesses not open to the public where all employees are related to the owner, (4) designated smoking areas in nursing homes, (5) retail tobacco stores, (6) outdoor patios, (7) private clubs with no employees. The law is enforced by the Ohio Department of Health, which began enforcement on May 3, 2007. A business may be fined up to $2,500 and individuals $100 for violation of the ban. Local governments may regulate smoking more stringently than the state. A ruling by the 10th District Court of Appeals in Columbus upheld the law, stating that a bar owner had intentionally violated it. The bar owner, facing violations and fines totaling $33,000, brought suit, claiming the ban is unconstitutional. On May 23, 2012, The Supreme Court of Ohio affirmed the ruling of the Tenth District Court of Appeals. [318]

North Royalton, April 16, 2008, passed Ordinance 08-69 banning smoking in public outdoor places owned by the city. Smoking areas may be designated at the mayor's discretion. [319]

Oberlin, June 2010, Oberlin, banned smoking and the use of smokeless tobacco in city parks.[320]

Oklahoma [ edit ]

No statewide smoking ban. Instead, Oklahoma's statewide smoking law prohibits smoking in any indoor workplaces  including restaurants and hotels  unless a separate ventilation system under negative pressure is installed for ventilating the smoking area, but permits smoking without limitation in bars, private clubs, bingo halls, retail tobacco stores, small family-owned workplaces, workplaces occupied exclusively by smokers, veterans' halls, and designated employee smoking areas.[321][322] The Oklahoma law expressly preempts local governments from enacting any local smoking regulations that are not exactly the same as the state law.[323] In February 2009, a committee of the Oklahoma Senate rejected a proposed ban on smoking in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants, and a similar bill before the Oklahoma House of Representatives failed when it was denied a committee hearing.[324] In May 2009, a bill before the Oklahoma House of Representatives to repeal the preemption on stricter local smoking regulation failed when it did not receive a committee hearing.[325]

Oregon [ edit ]

Statewide smoking ban: Effective January 1, 2009, after being signed into law on June 26, 2007, the 1981 Oregon Indoor Clean Air Act (as previously amended in 2001) was amended to ban smoking statewide in all enclosed workplaces in Oregon, including bars and restaurants, as well as within 10 feet (3.0 m) of the entrances, exits, or windows of such places.[326] The Act exempts (1) private residences except when serving as a childcare or adult care facility,[327] (2) designated hotel/motel smoking rooms, (3) spaces designated for traditional American Indian religious and cultural ceremonies, (4) retail tobacco shops, and (5) cigar bars.[328] Local governments may regulate smoking more stringently than the Act;[329] and the Oregon Court of Appeals reiterated this in 2000.[330]

Pennsylvania [ edit ]

Statewide smoking ban excluding bars, casinos and some restaurants . Effective September 11, 2008, after being signed into law by Governor Ed Rendell on June 13, 2008, Pennsylvania's 1988 Clean Indoor Air Act was amended to ban smoking statewide in all restaurants and other enclosed workplaces in Pennsylvania, except as exempted. [331] The Act exempts (1) eating/drinking establishments where 20% or less of sales come from food AND persons under 18 are not allowed, (2) private homes and vehicles, except those used as a child daycare or adult care facility, (3) designated hotel/motel smoking rooms, (4) full service truck stops, (5) retail tobacco shops, (6) workplaces of tobacco manufacturers and wholesalers, (7) nursing homes, (8) designated smoking areas in day treatment facilities, psychiatric facilities, and healthcare facilities, (9) private clubs when public events are not being held, including volunteer fire, ambulance, and rescue stations, (10) tobacco-related fundraisers, (11) places rented for tobacco exhibitions, (12) cigar bars, (13) 25% of a casino gaming floor, and (14) outdoor areas. [332] Local governments except Philadelphia are preempted from regulating smoking more stringently than the Act. [332] Philadelphia's smoking ordinance, which went into effect on January 8, 2007, bans smoking in all restaurants, exempting bars where food accounts for less than 10% of sales and alcohol accounts for more than 90% of sales, and persons under 18 are prohibited. [333] Philadelphia's ordinance is the only local smoking ban in Pennsylvania. [4] On April 29, 2014, Mayor Michael Nutter passed an executive order banning smoking in all city parks. [334] Allegheny County enacted a smoking ban October 2006, but it was immediately challenged in court as violating the 1988 Clean Indoor Air Act's preemption of all local smoking regulations. [335] In May 2007, the ban was overturned by the Pennsylvania Commonwealth Court. [335]

. Effective September 11, 2008, after being signed into law by Governor Ed Rendell on June 13, 2008, Pennsylvania's 1988 Clean Indoor Air Act was amended to ban smoking statewide in all restaurants and other enclosed workplaces in Pennsylvania, except as exempted. The Act exempts (1) eating/drinking establishments where 20% or less of sales come from food AND persons under 18 are not allowed, (2) private homes and vehicles, except those used as a child daycare or adult care facility, (3) designated hotel/motel smoking rooms, (4) full service truck stops, (5) retail tobacco shops, (6) workplaces of tobacco manufacturers and wholesalers, (7) nursing homes, (8) designated smoking areas in day treatment facilities, psychiatric facilities, and healthcare facilities, (9) private clubs when public events are not being held, including volunteer fire, ambulance, and rescue stations, (10) tobacco-related fundraisers, (11) places rented for tobacco exhibitions, (12) cigar bars, (13) 25% of a casino gaming floor, and (14) outdoor areas. Local governments except Philadelphia are preempted from regulating smoking more stringently than the Act. Philadelphia's smoking ordinance, which went into effect on January 8, 2007, bans smoking in all restaurants, exempting bars where food accounts for less than 10% of sales and alcohol accounts for more than 90% of sales, and persons under 18 are prohibited. Philadelphia's ordinance is the only local smoking ban in Pennsylvania. On April 29, 2014, Mayor Michael Nutter passed an executive order banning smoking in all city parks. Allegheny County enacted a smoking ban October 2006, but it was immediately challenged in court as violating the 1988 Clean Indoor Air Act's preemption of all local smoking regulations. In May 2007, the ban was overturned by the Pennsylvania Commonwealth Court. 'Smoking-Free Beaches' Program: Pennsylvania's 'Smoke-Free Beaches' program was initiated by the Pennsylvania Department of Conservation and Natural Resources. This program places smoking constraints at designated parks to eliminate smoking on beaches and swimming areas. For visitors who smoke and still want to use these beaches, designated areas adjacent to the beach are provided. The restriction includes cigarettes, pipes, cigars and the increasingly popular e-cigarettes. Staff at newly affected parks have been preparing for the change by purchasing and installing butt disposal units; installing new signage; establishing designated smoking areas with seating; and informing park user and support groups. In 2016, 12 state parks initiated new "Smoke Free Beaches." They were: Hills Creek, Tioga County; Lyman Run, Potter County; R.B. Winter, Union; Presque Isle, Erie; Pymatuning, Crawford, Laurel Hill, Somerset County; Whipple Dam, Huntingdon County; Gifford Pinchot, York County; Cowans Gap, Fulton County; Gouldsboro, Monroe County; Ricketts Glen, Luzerne County; and Worlds End, Sullivan.

Pennsylvania's 'Smoke-Free Beaches' program was initiated by the Pennsylvania Department of Conservation and Natural Resources. This program places smoking constraints at designated parks to eliminate smoking on beaches and swimming areas. For visitors who smoke and still want to use these beaches, designated areas adjacent to the beach are provided. The restriction includes cigarettes, pipes, cigars and the increasingly popular e-cigarettes. Staff at newly affected parks have been preparing for the change by purchasing and installing butt disposal units; installing new signage; establishing designated smoking areas with seating; and informing park user and support groups.

Puerto Rico [ edit ]

Territory-wide smoking ban: Effective March 2, 2007, smoking is banned territory-wide in all enclosed workplaces in Puerto Rico, including bars and restaurants, as well as private vehicles when either a minor in a car seat or a child under 13 is present.[336] The law exempts (1) retail tobacco stores, (2) theater and film productions and presentations in which actors smoke as part of their character, (3) private homes except when serving as a workplace, and (4) designated hotel/motel smoking rooms.[337]

Rhode Island [ edit ]

Statewide smoking ban: On March 1, 2005, the Public Health and Workplace Safety Act went into effect, banning smoking statewide in all enclosed workplaces in Rhode Island, including bars and restaurants.[338][339] The Act exempts (1) smoking bars (income over 50% tobacco products), (2) outdoor areas, (3) private and semiprivate rooms in nursing homes, (4) retail tobacco stores, (5) stage performances involving smoking, (6) hotel and motel rooms designated as smoking rooms, (7) private residences, except used as a licensed child care, adult daycare, or healthcare facility,[340] and (8) the two state-licensed gambling facilities, Newport Grand and Twin River Casino.[341] Local governments may regulate smoking more strictly than the Act,[342] though as of April 2009 none have chosen to do so.[4]

South Carolina [ edit ]

South Dakota [ edit ]

Statewide smoking ban: South Dakota voters passed 2009 H.B. 1240 on November 10, 2010. The bill bans smoking statewide in all enclosed workplaces in South Dakota, including bars and restaurants,[356] exempting only private residences unless used for child daycare,[356] cigar bars, retail tobacco shops, and a percentage of hotel and motel rooms.[357] The bill was passed in the South Dakota State Legislature and signed into law by Governor Mike Rounds. It was scheduled to take effect in July 2009, but on June 22, 2009, a group of casino and video lottery operators presented the Secretary of State with a petition for a referendum over H.B. 1240 that they claimed to bear 25,000 valid signatures.[358] On June 25, 2009, the Secretary of State certified that the petition indeed bore at least the required 16,776 valid signatures, putting H.B. 1240 to the November 2010 public referendum.[359] On July 24, 2009, the Secretary of State declared that after further review, the number of valid signatures on the petition fell short of the required number to put the issue on the ballot.[360] On November 13, 2009, however, Circuit Judge Kathleen Trandahl ruled that the petition did have enough valid signatures, and ordered the Secretary of State to put the issue to a public vote on November 2, 2010,[361] which ultimately passed. H.B. 1240 is silent as to whether local governments may regulate smoking more stringently, though as of November 2010 no local governments in South Dakota have done so.

Tennessee [ edit ]

No statewide smoking ban. Instead, Tennessee's 2007 statewide smoking law, the Non-Smoker Protection Act, prohibits smoking statewide in all public places in Tennessee, except as exempted;[362] (1) any business, including a bar or restaurant, that does not serve persons under 21, (2) designated hotel/motel smoking rooms, (3) tobacco industry-related facilities, (4) outdoor areas and areas with an open garage door, (5) nursing homes, (6) designated smoking areas not accessible to the general public in businesses with three or fewer employees, (7) private clubs, (8) private residences and vehicles unless it is being used for child care, daycare, or public transportation of children, (9) retail tobacco stores, and (10) commercial vehicles occupied solely by the operator.[363] Local governments are preempted from regulating smoking.[364]

Texas [ edit ]

United States Virgin Islands [ edit ]

Territory-wide smoking ban: Effective February 10, 2011, smoking is banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants, and in outdoor service lines.[387]

Utah [ edit ]

Statewide smoking ban : Effective January 1, 2007, as passed in March 2006 (amended in 2012), [388] Utah's 1995 Indoor Clean Air Act was expanded to ban smoking statewide in all enclosed workplaces in Utah, including bars and restaurants (bars and private clubs were exempt until January 1, 2009), exempting only (1) designated hotel/motel smoking rooms, (2) areas of owner-operated businesses with no employees besides the owner, [389] and (3) American Indian religious and cultural ceremonies. [390] Since the state law supersedes any ordinances passed by political subdivisions of the state (i.e., cities, counties, school districts, agencies, etc.), such political subdivisions are preempted from regulating indoor smoking any more or less stringently than the Act. [391] Utah is one of the few states with a statewide smoking ban that does not exempt tobacconists. Local outdoor smoking bans : Notwithstanding the preemption against political subdivisions modifying the restrictions on indoor smoking, the Act expressly allows such political subdivisions to regulate "smoking in outdoor places of public access which are owned or operated by" (emphasis added) a political subdivision (specifically including state institutions of public or higher education). [391] Accordingly, some political subdivisions have enacted local ordinances prohibiting smoking in certain outdoor areas such as schools, parks, [392] and public transit facilities. [393]

: Effective January 1, 2007, as passed in March 2006 (amended in 2012), Utah's 1995 Indoor Clean Air Act was expanded to ban smoking statewide in all enclosed workplaces in Utah, including bars and restaurants (bars and private clubs were exempt until January 1, 2009), exempting only (1) designated hotel/motel smoking rooms, (2) areas of owner-operated businesses with no employees besides the owner, and (3) American Indian religious and cultural ceremonies. Since the state law supersedes any ordinances passed by political subdivisions of the state (i.e., cities, counties, school districts, agencies, etc.), such political subdivisions are preempted from regulating smoking any more or less stringently than the Act. Utah is one of the few states with a statewide smoking ban that does not exempt tobacconists.

Vermont [ edit ]

Statewide smoking ban: Effective September 1, 2005, smoking is banned in all enclosed workplaces in Vermont, including all bars and restaurants,[394] except in areas of owner-operated businesses with no employees that are not open to the public,[395] although separately ventilated designated smoking areas in businesses where employees are not required to be were exempt until July 1, 2009.[396] Designated unenclosed smoking areas in businesses where the layout of the workplace is such that smoking would not be a physical irritation to any nonsmoking employee and three-fourths of the employees agreed were also exempt until July 1, 2009.[396] The Vermont Veterans Home in Bennington is the only non-owner-operated workplace in the state permitted to allow smoking.[396] Vermont is one of the few states with a statewide smoking ban that does not expressly exempt tobacconists, and is one of four states that does not allow the designation of hotel/motel smoking rooms. Local governments may regulate smoking more stringently than the state law.[397][398]

Illegal to smoke in a car with a passenger under age 8.

Virginia [ edit ]

No statewide smoking ban. Instead, Virginia's 2009 statewide smoking law, the 2009 Indoor Clean Air Act prohibits smoking statewide in enclosed public elevators, public school buses, primary and secondary schools, hospital emergency rooms, health department offices, polling places, indoor service lines and cashier lines, public restrooms in government buildings and hospitals, child daycare centers except where located in a private home, and public restrooms of health care facilities, and relegating smoking in restaurants (including bars) to separately ventilated designated smoking rooms that are structurally separated from the rest of the establishment.[399][400] The Act exempts private clubs, retail tobacco stores, tobacco warehouses, tobacco manufacturing facilities, prisons, designated smoking areas in government offices, food preparation facilities for catering services, restaurants located on the premises of tobacco manufacturers, rented private rooms in restaurants; requires the reasonable designation of non-smoking areas in educational facilities where smoking is not banned, hospitals, retail stores bigger than 15,000 square feet (1,400 m2), and recreational facilities.[399]

Local governments are preempted from regulating smoking more stringently than the Act.[399] Effectively, the cost and complexity involved with complying with the law's requirements for separately ventilated smoking areas has meant that nearly all Virginia bars and restaurants operate completely smoke-free. Since 2006, smoking in state offices, vehicles, and buildings (except for correctional facilities) has been banned by executive order issued by the Governor of Virginia.[401] A law which came into effect on July 1, 2016 banned smoking in private cars with any occupants who are 8 years or younger.[402]

Norfolk, March 25, 2008, repealed a ban on smoking in restaurants, which was passed in October 2007 but had not yet gone into effect, by City Council vote of 52, because the City Attorney advised the Council that its ban would violate Virginia state law and could not withstand a legal challenge. [403]



Washington [ edit ]

Statewide smoking ban : On December 8, 2005, after ratification by a majority of Washington voters in a statewide initiative referendum, an amendment to Washington's 1985 Clean Indoor Air Act became effective banning smoking statewide in all public places and places of employment in Washington (except 25% of hotel/motel rooms), [404] as well as within 25 feet (7.6 m) of doors, windows, or ventilation intakes to such places. [405] The act exempts private enclosed workplaces [406] and private residences except when being used to provide licensed childcare, foster care, adult care, or other similar social service care. [407] Washington does not provide exemptions for tobacconists or businesses whose sole purpose is to provide an environment for smoking (e.g. hookah lounges, cigar bars). However, private clubs in enclosed spaces with no employees, and businesses on tribal lands, are exempt. Local governments may regulate smoking more stringently than the act, [406] and local health boards are authorized to enforce the act locally. [408] Mason County, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants [4]

: On December 8, 2005, after ratification by a majority of Washington voters in a statewide initiative referendum, an amendment to Washington's 1985 Clean Indoor Air Act became effective banning smoking statewide in all public places and places of employment in Washington (except 25% of hotel/motel rooms), as well as within 25 feet (7.6 m) of doors, windows, or ventilation intakes to such places. The act exempts private enclosed workplaces and private residences except when being used to provide licensed childcare, foster care, adult care, or other similar social service care. Washington does not provide exemptions for tobacconists or businesses whose sole purpose is to provide an environment for smoking (e.g. hookah lounges, cigar bars). However, private clubs in enclosed spaces with no employees, and businesses on tribal lands, are exempt. Local governments may regulate smoking more stringently than the act, and local health boards are authorized to enforce the act locally.

West Virginia [ edit ]

Wisconsin [ edit ]

Statewide smoking ban: On July 5, 2010, after being signed into law by Governor Jim Doyle on May 18, 2009, S.B. 181 (2009 Wisconsin Act 12) took effect, banning smoking statewide in all enclosed workplaces in Wisconsin, including all bars, restaurants, lodging establishments, and private clubs, as well as within a "reasonable distance" outdoors from any such place, except in bar/restaurant outdoor patios.[420] The Act exempts only cigar bars or retail tobacco stores already in existence, private residences, and rooms in nursing homes in which the occupants agree to allow smoking; it does not cover casinos run by American Indian tribes, as those casinos are in the tribes' sovereign territory.[420] Local governments are preempted from regulating smoking more strictly than the Act.[420] Prior to this law taking effect, several localities in Wisconsin had local smoking bans in effect.

[421]

Wyoming [ edit ]

No statewide smoking ban. Instead, Wyoming state law only prohibits smoking where it could cause an explosion [422] [423] [424] and in underground mines. [425] Wyoming has no state laws concerning indoor smoking in general, and thus local governments can regulate general indoor smoking as they see fit. As of July 2017, six cities in Wyoming have enacted local smoking bans, all covering all bars and restaurants, but varying otherwise. [4] In February 2009, a bill before the Wyoming Legislature that would have enacted a statewide ban on smoking in all enclosed workplaces, except in private offices and in bars and restaurants serving only patrons over 21 years of age (and except in any local community that chose to opt out) failed when it was passed by the Wyoming House of Representatives in a vote of 3129 but then was denied a committee hearing in the Wyoming Senate. [426]

Instead, Wyoming state law only prohibits smoking where it could cause an explosion and in underground mines. Wyoming has no state laws concerning indoor smoking in general, and thus local governments can regulate general indoor smoking as they see fit. As of July 2017, six cities in Wyoming have enacted local smoking bans, all covering all bars and restaurants, but varying otherwise. In February 2009, a bill before the Wyoming Legislature that would have enacted a statewide ban on smoking in all enclosed workplaces, except in private offices and in bars and restaurants serving only patrons over 21 years of age (and except in any local community that chose to opt out) when it was passed by the Wyoming House of Representatives in a vote of 3129 but then was denied a committee hearing in the Wyoming Senate. Localities in Wyoming with a smoking ban that includes all bars and restaurants (6 total): Burlington, October 9, 2008, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants [4] Casper, September 1, 2012, banned in bars and restaurants, but not other workplaces; on June 28, 2013, the Casper City Council repealed the ban on smoking in bars by a vote of 5-4 but left the restaurant ban in place; [427] On November 4, 2015, the ban on smoking in bars was reinstated on a special election vote by 54 percent of voters [428] Cheyenne, August 15, 2006, banned in all bars and restaurants, but not in all other workplaces; [4] ban includes private clubs. [ citation needed ] Evanston, September 4, 2007, banned in all bars and restaurants, but not in all other workplaces [4] Laramie, April 6, 2005, banned in all bars and restaurants, but not in all other workplaces; [4] ban includes private clubs. [ citation needed ] Mountain View, June 1, 2011, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants [4]

Localities in Wyoming with a smoking ban that does not include all bars and restaurants (1 total): Rock Springs, March 1, 2008, banned in all restaurants, but not bars, private clubs, and other workplaces. [429]



See also [ edit ]