What do you call a doctor who performs abortions?
This is not a trick question. Or at least it shouldn't be.

And it doesn't matter if you are for abortion rights or against abortion rights. It is a question of whether the media is continuing to downplay or sanitize one of the darkest, most heinous crimes in the era of legalized abortion.

It begins with the makers of a new film seeking to buy a sponsorship on the National Public Radio interview show "Fresh Air."

The proposed ad simply said: "Support for this NPR program comes from the film 'Gosnell: The Trial of America's Biggest Serial Killer.' The film is the true story of abortionist Kermit Gosnell. A story the mainstream media tried to cover up because it reveals the truth about abortion."

Gosnell ran an abortion clinic in West Philadelphia for more than 30 years before investigators found that he had performed hundreds of late-term abortions in filthy, unsafe conditions, often delivering live infants that he would kill in horrific fashion.

If it rains where you live, you need flood insurance One sensible solution is to include flood coverage with a homeowner's policy unless the owner opts out.

He was eventually convicted in the deaths of three of those infants. The New York Times reported the jury's verdict: "A doctor who was responsible for cutting the spines of babies after botched abortions was convicted Monday (Aug. 9, 2014) of three counts of first-degree murder in a case that became a sharp rallying cry for anti-abortion activists."

Major news outlets at the time were criticized for ignoring or underplaying the Gosnell investigations and the crimes, which included allegations that Pennsylvania health officials intentionally ignored what was going on in Gosnell's clinic. Everything, in other words, that the media usually rushes to put on their websites.

John Sullivan, the executive producer of "Gosnell," which opens in theaters Oct. 12, had already overcome resistance in getting the movie made, so he said he was willing to work with NPR in getting the "Fresh Air" sponsorship ad done.

According to e-mails provided to The Daily Beast, NPR's representative presented the proposed ad to the network's legal department, which requested some editing including that "The word 'abortionist' will also need to be changed to the neutral word 'doctor.'"

Sullivan suggested using the term "abortion doctor" but NPR said it would only accept the phrase "Philadelphia doctor Kermit Gosnell" as the description.

That was not acceptable for the filmmakers. "Our movie isn't about a podiatrist or a cardiologist or a proctologist," producer Phelim McAleer told The Daily Beast. "It's specifically about a doctor who performs abortions."

NPR's Senior Director of Media Relations Isabel Lara told the website that, "Sponsor credits that run on NPR are required to be value-neutral to comply with FCC requirements and to avoid suggesting bias in NPR's journalism."

What was not neutral about the term "abortion doctor"?

The Daily Beast points out that a search of NPR stories online turn up titles like, "'Joyce Carol Oates' New Novel Begins With an Abortion Doctor's Murder' and 'Abortion Doctor Killer Appeals to Kansas High Court.' NPR even did a special series called 'Training the next generation of abortion doctors.' Heck, there was even an NPR news story about Kermit Gosnell himself, and it was headlined, 'Convicted Philadelphia Abortion Doctor Gets Life in Prison.'"

The Kermit Gosnell story makes supporters of abortion rights squeamish and has helped fuel the efforts of state lawmakers to put more regulations on abortion clinics. Abortion-rights supporters have condemned Gosnell as a rogue operator and well beyond the norm of how the overwhelming majority of abortion clinics operate.

That doesn't warrant the media's resistance to airing the newsworthy facts. How is describing Gosnell as an "abortion doctor" wrong, inaccurate or objectionable?

LSU isn't lowering standards, it's raising hopes Sometimes working hard and playing by the rules can still get you statistically eliminated.

The grand jury report on Gosnell concluded: "This case is about a doctor who killed babies and endangered women. What we mean is that he regularly and illegally delivered live, viable babies in the third trimester of pregnancy -- and then murdered these newborns by severing their spinal cords with scissors. The medical practice by which he carried out this business was a filthy fraud in which he overdosed his patients with dangerous drugs, spread venereal disease among them with infected instruments, perforated their wombs and bowels -- and, on at least two occasions, caused their deaths."

Gosnell was a monster. He also was an "abortion doctor." Arguing over "value-neutral" words is an insult to his victims.

Tim Morris is a columnist on the Latitude team at NOLA.com | The Times-Picayune. Latitude is a place to share opinions about the challenges facing Louisiana. Follow @LatitudeNOLA on Facebook and Twitter. Write to Tim at tmorris@nola.com.