Assessment of Fuel Economy Technologies for Light-Duty Vehicles
down heavy hydrocarbons into lighter fractions. This is commonly called cracking. Diesel fuel requires less “molecular manipulation” for the conversion of crude oil into useful fuel. So if one wants to minimize the barrels of crude oil used per 100 miles, diesel would be a better choice than gasoline.

Ethanol as a fuel for SI engines is receiving much attention as a means of reducing dependence on imported petroleum and also of producing less greenhouse gas (GHG). Today ethanol is blended with gasoline at about 10 percent. Proponents of ethanol would like to see the greater availability of a fuel called E85, which is a blend of 85 percent ethanol and 15 percent gasoline. The use of 100 percent ethanol is widespread in Brazil, but it is unlikely to be used in the United States because engines have difficulty starting in cold weather with this fuel.

The effectiveness of ethanol in reducing GHG is a controversial subject that is not addressed here, since it generally does not affect the technologies discussed in this report. It is interesting to note that in a very early period of gasoline shortage, it was touted as a fuel of the future (Foljambe, 1916).

Ethanol has about 65 percent of the heat of combustion of gasoline, so the fuel consumption is roughly 50 percent higher as measured in gallons per 100 miles. Ethanol has a higher octane rating than that of gasoline, and this is often cited as an advantage. Normally high octane enables increases in the compression ratio and hence efficiency. To take advantage of this form of efficiency increase, the engine would need to be redesigned to accommodate an increased combustion ratio. For technical reasons the improvement with ethanol is very small. Also, during any transition period, vehicles that run on 85 to 100 percent ethanol must also run on gasoline, and since the compression ratio cannot be changed after the engine is built, the higher octane rating of ethanol fuel has not led to gains in efficiency. A way to enable this efficiency increase is to modify the SI engine so that selective ethanol injection is allowed. This technology is being developed and is further discussed in Chapter 4 of this report.

FUEL ECONOMY TESTING AND REGULATIONS

The regulation of vehicle fuel economy requires a reproducible test standard. The test currently uses a driving cycle or test schedule originally developed for emissions regulation, which simulated urban-commute driving in Los Angeles in the late 1960s and the early 1970s. This cycle is variously referred to as the LA-4, the urban dynamometer driving schedule (UDDS), and the city cycle. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) later added a second cycle to better capture somewhat higher-speed driving: this cycle is known as the highway fuel economy test (HWFET) driving schedule, or the highway cycle. The combination of these two test cycles (weighted using a 55 percent city cycle and 45 percent highway cycle split) is known as the Federal Test Procedure (FTP). This report focuses on fuel consumption data that reflect legal compliance with the CAFE requirements and thus do not include EPA’s adjustments for its labeling program, as described below. Also discussed below are some technologies—such as those that reduce air- conditioning power demands or requirements—that improve on-road fuel economy but are not directly captured in the FTP.

Compliance with the NHTSA’s CAFE regulation depends on the city and highway vehicle dynamometer tests developed and conducted by the EPA for its exhaust emission regulatory program. The results of the two tests are combined (harmonic mean) with a weighting of 55 percent city and 45 percent highway driving. Manufacturers self-certify their vehicles using preproduction prototypes representative of classes of vehicles and engines. The EPA then conducts tests in its laboratories of 10 to 15 percent of the vehicles to verify what the manufacturers report. For its labeling program, the EPA adjusts the compliance values of fuel economy in an attempt to better reflect what vehicle owners actually experience. The certification tests yield fuel consumption (gallons per 100 miles) that is about 25 percent better (less than) EPA- estimated real-world fuel economy. Analysis of the 2009 EPA fuel economy data set for more than 1,000 vehicle models yields a model-averaged difference of about 30 percent.

The certification test fails to capture the full array of driving conditions encountered during vehicle operations. Box 2.1 provides some of the reasons why the certification test does not reflect actual driving. Beginning with model year 2008, the EPA began collecting data on three additional test cycles to capture the effect of higher speed and acceleration, air-conditioner use, and cold weather. These data are part of air pollution emission compliance testing but not fuel economy or proposed greenhouse gas compliance. However, the results from these three test cycles will be used with the two FTP cycles to report the fuel economy on the vehicle label. Table 2.2 summarizes the characteristics of the five test schedules. This additional information guides the selection of a correction factor, but an understanding of fuel consumption based on actual in-use measurement is lacking.

The unfortunate consequence of the disparity between the official CAFE (and proposed greenhouse gas regulation) certification tests and how vehicles are driven in use is that manufacturers have a diminished incentive to design vehicles to deliver real-world improvements in fuel economy if such improvements are not captured by the official test. Some examples of vehicle design improvements that are not completely represented in the official CAFE test are more efficient air conditioning; cabin heat load reduction through heat-resistant glazing and heat-reflective paints; more efficient power steering; efficient engine and drive train operation at all speeds, accelerations, and road grades; and reduced drag to include the effect of wind. The certification tests give no incentive to provide information to the driver that would improve operational efficiency or to reward control strategies that compensate for driver characteristics that increase fuel consumption.