How Does the Sun Affect Our Climate?
The Sun-climate connection

Active regions of the Sun

Image: NASA's Solar Dynamics Observatory

The Sun is the source of most of the energy that drives the biological and physical processes in the world around us—in oceans and on land it fuels plant growth that forms the base of the food chain, and in the atmosphere it warms air which drives our weather.

Figure 1. Approximately two and a half solar cycles of Total Solar Irradiance (TSI), also called 'solar constant', in power (watts) per square meter. These annual, average TSI measurements were compiled by the Active Cavity Radiometer Irradiance Monitor (ACRIM), the Physikalisch-Meteorologisches Observatorium / World Radiation Center (PMOD), and the Royal Meteorological Institute of Belgium (RMIB).

Image: IPCC AR5

The rate of energy coming from the Sun changes slightly day to day. Over many millennia the Earth-Sun orbital relationship can change the geographical distribution of the sun’s energy over the Earth’s surface. It has been suggested that changes in solar output might affect our climate—both directly, by changing the rate of solar heating of the Earth and atmosphere, and indirectly, by changing cloud forming processes.

Over the time-scale of millions of years, the change in solar intensity is a critical factor influencing climate (e.g., ice ages). However, changes in the rate of solar heating over the last century cannot account for the magnitude of the rise in global mean temperature since the late 1970s.

Are changes in solar radiation contributing to global warming?

The bottom two black spots on the sun, known as sunspots, appeared quickly over the course of Feb. 19-20, 2013. These two sunspots are part of the same system and are over six Earths across. This image combines images from two instruments on NASA's Solar Dynamics Observatory (SDO): the Helioseismic and Magnetic Imager (HMI), which takes pictures in visible light that show sunspots and the Advanced Imaging Assembly (AIA), which took an image in the 304 angstrom wavelength showing the lower atmosphere of the sun, which is colorized in red.

Image: NASA/SDO/AIA/HMI/Goddard Space Flight Center

Scientists have considered the sun-climate hypothesis to explain Earth’s rapid warming. The evidence collected show that the sun noticeably affects our climate over millions of years, but it is not the cause of recent warming.

The rate at which energy from the Sun reaches the top of Earth’s atmosphere is called “total solar irradiance” (or TSI). TSI fluctuates slightly from day to day and week to week. In addition to these rapid, short-term fluctuations, there is an 11-year cycle in TSI measurements related to “sunspots” (a part of the Sun’s surface that is temporarily cooler and darker than its neighboring regions).

Two different hypotheses have been proposed to test whether solar radiation can explain climate change.

Hypothesis 1: UV rays, ozone, and clouds

The Electromagnetic Spectrum

Image: NASA

The first hypothesis relies on the fact that in both the 11 year cycle and, in the longer term, the changes in solar energy are highest at ultraviolet (short) wavelengths.

The short wavelength radiation is particularly effective in modifying ozone concentrations in the level of the atmosphere above where typical weather occurs.

According to this hypothesis, modifications in the ozone layer could in turn filter down to that level of the atmosphere where our weather is formed, potentially modifying clouds and temperatures there.