What We’re Doing
What We’re Doing

We've been campaigning for a green and peaceful future for 40 years — and we're not stopping now. It's time to rise up like never before and fight for our climate and communities.

Colorful streamers float on the wind under the St. Johns Bridge where climbers and kayaktivists attempt to prevent the Shell-leased icebreaker MSV Fennica from joining Shell's Arctic oil drilling fleet. The Fennica came to Portland to have a gash in its hull repaired after being damaged in the Arctic as Shell prepared to explore for oil in the Chukchi Sea.

We defend the natural world and promote peace by investigating, exposing, and confronting environmental abuse, championing environmentally responsible solutions, and advocating for the rights and well-being of all people.

With the election of Donald Trump to the presidency, the road to a green and peaceful future became a lot steeper — but we’re not backing down.

The threat Trump poses is nearly as enormous as climate change itself. He’s trying to move this country backwards while the rest of the world is moving forward. When a force vows to undo all the progress the people in this country have made, the only way to stop it is to unite in peaceful resistance. That’s why we’re so glad to have you on our side.

It’s going to take a huge effort, made possible by people all over the world. That’s where you come in. Our movement is inclusive, people-powered, and collective, with people like you at the center.

Empowerment goes both ways. The weight and resources that we’re able to devote to pushing for a greener and more peaceful world are only made possible because of the courage, heart, and the collective power of people like you.

Our Campaigns

Saving the Arctic

The Arctic is one of the most unique places on Earth. It spans eight countries, is home to more than 13 million people and provides a habitat for some of the most incredible wildlife on Earth. And now, it’s become a major battleground in the fight to stop climate change and keep fossil fuels where they belong — in the ground.

Protecting Forests

Forests are crucial for the health and well-being of people, wildlife and our planet. They’re home to roughly two-thirds of all land-dwelling plant and animal species, critical lifelines for communities big and small, and one of the last lines of defense against catastrophic climate change.

Fighting Global Warming

If climate denial is going to be the default position of the Trump White House, then relentless resistance will be the default position of the American people. Our world is warmer than ever before, and people and wildlife are already suffering the consequences. But that’s nothing compared to what we’re leaving future generations if these trends continue. It’s time to stop the destruction and build the clean energy future we deserve.

Protecting Our Oceans

Healthy oceans are the life support system for our planet, providing 97 percent of the Earth’s livable habitat and a home to more than 700,000 species. The oceans are vital to human health as well, providing jobs, enjoyment, and food to billions of people. Half of the oxygen we breathe is generated by our oceans.

Living Toxic-Free

We all deserve to live our lives free of the harmful impacts of toxic chemicals. Whether by pushing for safer chemical plants or detoxing the clothing we wear every day, we’re working towards a toxic-free future for all.

Promoting Sustainable Agriculture

Agriculture should work with our natural environment, not against it. We all deserve food that’s nutritious, delicious, and healthy — both for people and the planet. That’s not the reality we live in today, but it can be.

Defending Democracy

The most powerful force on the planet is people power. It’s stronger than any government and any climate-denying, white supremacist, xenophobic president — but only if we act. Now more than ever, we must unite as a movement against a Trump presidency that means more fossil fuel corruption and less protection for people and the planet.

Learn more about how we’re fighting for a green and peaceful future at the links below.