Energy Leadership
The United States is the world’s leading natural gas and oil producer and refiner. That energy leadership means America is stronger, more secure and more prosperous.

Through ever-advancing technology and 21st-century innovation, the natural gas and oil industry provides the energy that has made the United States the world’s leading producer and refiner – both of which are foundational to American energy leadership in the world. Today’s natural gas and oil industry is invested in the brainpower, engineering and scientific initiatives that are developing reserves safely and efficiently so that the U.S. can fully harness the power of American energy.

“Despite the progress we made over the last five years we ought to see that move exponentially again over the next five and 10 years.”

- Ryan Lance, ConocoPhillips chairman and CEO

Lowest Net Imports of Petroleum In More Than 50 Years Thanks to U.S. global leadership in natural gas and oil production, petroleum imports (crude oil and refined products) are at their lowest level since the 1960s. Americans can look to the future from a position of energy strength – more self-sufficient, energy secure and able to provide leadership around the world, helping friends and deterring adversaries.

10.3 Million Jobs The natural gas and oil industry supports 10.3 million jobs across the economy. This includes hundreds of thousands of well-paying jobs using cutting-edge technologies. Our industry is driving broad economic growth that benefits millions of Americans with greater opportunity and freedom to thrive.

World Leader in Reducing CO 2 No nation on earth has reduced carbon dioxide emissions as much as the U.S. since 2005. Our CO 2 emissions have fallen to their lowest level in 25 years – largely because of increased use of clean natural gas – while the rest of the world’s CO 2 emissions have risen 50 percent since 1990.

10.7 Million Barrels of U.S. Oil Produced Per Day (2018 10-month average) - more than double levels a decade ago 70% Net U.S. petroleum imports lowered by 70% since 2005 due to domestic production 88 Billion Cubic feet per day of U.S. natural gas and natural gas liquids marketed production making the U.S. the world’s top producer in 2018

Read Next:

Energy for a Cleaner Environment