Climate Change - the REAL inconvenient truth: Scientist claims global warming is NATURAL
GETTY Climate change is NATURAL: Scientist blows global warming debate WIDE OPEN

Well respected Australian scientist Jennifer Marohasy says global temperatures would have still risen without the industrial revolution – essentially dismissing the claim that man is responsible for climate change. Most scientists will say climate change is caused by an increase of CO2 being ploughed into the atmosphere thanks to the industrial revolution. But Dr Marohasy along with fellow scientist Dr John Abbot state this assumption is based on a model which was decided almost 120 years ago. That model, mustered up by Swedish scientist Svante Arrhenius who is considered one of the godfathers of physical chemistry, claimed carbon dioxide absorbs infrared radiation.

GETTY The ice caps are melting due to global warming

While the fact that carbon dioxide absorbs infrared radiation is not disputed, what Dr Maloney and co argue is that it is not correlated correctly to a heating globe. The scientists add little work has been done in the following century to update this model. But to correctly analyse the effect of CO2 in the atmosphere, they began collecting data which offered ways to measure temperatures over the last 2,000 years such as tree rings and coral cores.

GETTY The industrial revolution may not be to blame

Dr Marohasy and Dr Abbot published a paper in the journal GeoResJ outlining their study of climate change using neural network technology. They fed this data into a machine learning neural network which offered prediction patterns of temperatures for the last two millennia if there was not extra CO2. The computer predicted temperatures which almost exactly match what global temperatures have been, even if there was not an industrial revolution. They also found the world was warmer during the Medieval times.

Dr Marohasy wrote on her personal blog there would have also been a spike in temperatures from 1983-2012 – something which scientists have indeed observed. The scientists says global warming is a natural phenomenon which heats the globe in cycles – much like how Ice Ages have cooled Earth throughout history. In reference to her study published in GeoResJ, Dr Marohasy writes on her blog: “The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) estimates warming of approximately 1°C, but attributes this all to industrialisation.”

GETTY Earth would be heating regardless of the industrial revolution, says Dr Marohasy

She adds: “To be clear, while mainstream climate science is replete with published proxy temperature studies showing that temperatures have cycled up and down over the last 2,000 years – spiking during the Medieval Warm Period and then again recently to about 1980 – the official IPCC reconstructions (which underpin the Paris Accord) deny such cycles. “Through this denial, leaders from within this much-revered community can claim that there is something unusual about current temperatures: that we have catastrophic global warming from industrialisation.” Dr Marohasy, whose long list of credentials include setting up The Climate Modelling Laboratory and director of the Australian Environment Foundation until 2008, scathingly concludes: “The science is far from settled.”

Air pollution across the world Tue, May 22, 2018 Take a look through these stunning drone images, highlighting the effects of pollution on planet earth but also the opportunities to tackle this scary problem. Play slideshow Mark Baker 1 of 11 The tanks and stacks of Fawley Refinery in the New Forest