Explained: Narconon and Its Connection to Scientology
How Successful Is the Narconon Program?

Narconon claims of success are remarkably high, ranging between 60% and 86%. Their defined measure of success is a client who has completed the program and remained drug-free for at least one year afterwards.

Critics of Narconon, however, point to a few disquieting facts:

Narconon’s own publicity materials present different success rates – 8 publications, 7 different results .

. Lack of documentation for the claims, which are often touted without citation.

At least 2 of the sources are, in fact, Scientology publications, indicating a strong possibility of bias.

By having a very broad interpretation of results, Narconon is criticized for misrepresenting their supposedly success.

It is this last practice that is of particular concern.

For example, Narconon frequently points to a 1981 Swedish study that supposedly shows the program has a success rate of 78.6%. This same study is also the quoted source reporting that Narconon was 84.6% successful.

However, a closer examination of the report paints an entirely different – and unflattering – picture.

Entering the program – 61 people

people Left during detoxification – 24

Left during the other stages – 23

Completed the program – 14

Right away, you can see that neither percentage representing the entire sample could possibly be true, because the “graduation” rate – 14/61 – was just under 23%.

13 of the 14 graduates were able to be contacted. Of those, 4 had stayed drug-free since graduation, and 7 were currently drug-free, even though they had previously relapsed. This is the source of the “84.6” figure – 11/13. The “78.6%” figure is arrived at when the missing 14th person is included – 11/14.

But obviously, these are incomplete representations. Remember, only 4 people who had entered the program were able to stay drug-free.

When you divide those 4 by the 61, who had entered the program, Narconon’s “success” rate drops to just 6.6%.