Cannabis Effects on Driving Skills
Clin Chem . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 Mar 1. Published in final edited form as: doi: 10.1373/clinchem.2012.194381 PMCID: PMC3836260 NIHMSID: NIHMS488287 PMID: 23220273 Cannabis Effects on Driving Skills 1,2 and 1,* Rebecca L. Hartman 1Chemistry and Drug Metabolism, Intramural Research Program, National Institute on Drug Abuse, National Institutes of Health, Baltimore, MD 2Program in Toxicology, Graduate Program in Life Sciences, University of Maryland Baltimore, Baltimore, MD Find articles by Rebecca L. Hartman Marilyn A. Huestis 1Chemistry and Drug Metabolism, Intramural Research Program, National Institute on Drug Abuse, National Institutes of Health, Baltimore, MD Find articles by Marilyn A. Huestis Author information Copyright and License information Disclaimer 1Chemistry and Drug Metabolism, Intramural Research Program, National Institute on Drug Abuse, National Institutes of Health, Baltimore, MD 2Program in Toxicology, Graduate Program in Life Sciences, University of Maryland Baltimore, Baltimore, MD *Address correspondence to this author at: Chemistry and Drug Metabolism, Intramural Research Program, National Institute on Drug Abuse, National Institutes of Health, 251 Bayview Blvd., Suite 200, Rm. 05A-721, Baltimore, MD 21224. Fax 443-740-2823; Address correspondence to this author at: Chemistry and Drug Metabolism, Intramural Research Program, National Institute on Drug Abuse, National Institutes of Health, 251 Bayview Blvd., Suite 200, Rm. 05A-721, Baltimore, MD 21224. Fax 443-740-2823; vog.hin.adin.artni@sitseuhm Copyright notice

Associated Data Supplementary Materials Supplemental Table 1. NIHMS488287-supplement-table_1.pdf (76K) GUID: 91EBB480-C2D2-4B71-9E3E-4FDD038D5CE4 Supplemental Table 2. NIHMS488287-supplement-table_2.pdf (73K) GUID: 138FFDCF-777C-4FF9-83B2-48A70E62B437 Supplemental Table 3. NIHMS488287-supplement-table_3.pdf (117K) GUID: 11FAC47B-15E3-4E47-94FF-3A06EBE30063 Supplemental Table 4. NIHMS488287-supplement-table_4.pdf (99K) GUID: 2720B03A-7155-4699-B443-73DFE7284EDB Supplemental Table 5. NIHMS488287-supplement-table_5.pdf (88K) GUID: 77EE8B92-D097-4621-B75E-2C1289DD74E5

Abstract BACKGROUND Cannabis is the most prevalent illicit drug identified in impaired drivers. The effects of cannabis on driving continue to be debated, making prosecution and legislation difficult. Historically, delays in sample collection, evaluating the inactive Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) metabolite 11-nor-9-carboxy-THC, and polydrug use have complicated epidemiologic evaluations of driver impairment after cannabis use. CONTENT We review and evaluate the current literature on cannabis’ effects on driving, highlighting the epidemiologic and experimental data. Epidemiologic data show that the risk of involvement in a motor vehicle accident (MVA) increases approximately 2-fold after cannabis smoking. The adjusted risk of driver culpability also increases substantially, particularly with increased blood THC concentrations. Studies that have used urine as the biological matrix have not shown an association between cannabis and crash risk. Experimental data show that drivers attempt to compensate by driving more slowly after smoking cannabis, but control deteriorates with increasing task complexity. Cannabis smoking increases lane weaving and impaired cognitive function. Critical-tracking tests, reaction times, divided-attention tasks, and lane-position variability all show cannabis-induced impairment. Despite purported tolerance in frequent smokers, complex tasks still show impairment. Combining cannabis with alcohol enhances impairment, especially lane weaving. SUMMARY Differences in study designs frequently account for inconsistencies in results between studies. Participant-selection bias and confounding factors attenuate ostensible cannabis effects, but the association with MVA often retains significance. Evidence suggests recent smoking and/or blood THC concentrations 2–5 ng/mL are associated with substantial driving impairment, particularly in occasional smokers. Future cannabis-and-driving research should emphasize challenging tasks, such as divided attention, and include occasional and chronic daily cannabis smokers.

Nearly two thirds of US trauma center admissions are due to motor vehicle accidents (MVAs),3 with almost 60% of such patients testing positive for drugs or alcohol (1). In 2010, 11.4% of Americans 12 years or older drove under the influence of alcohol, and 10.6 million drove under the influence of illicit drugs (2). Despite real or perceived impairment, individuals report a willingness to drive if there is a good reason (3, 4) or if they believe they are tolerant (5). Alcohol and cannabis are the drugs most frequently detected (6). Cannabis is the most widely consumed illicit substance worldwide (2). In 2009, 125–203 million individuals 15–64 years of age ingested cannabis in the previous year (7). In the US in 2010, 6.9% of individuals ≥12 years old had smoked cannabis in the previous month (2). The 2007 National Roadside Survey reported cannabis as the most common illicit drug quantified in drivers’ blood or oral fluid (OF), with 8.6% of nighttime drivers testing positive for Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) (6, 8). Thus, driving under the influence of cannabis (DUIC) is a growing public health concern. The acute psychological effects of cannabinoids include euphoria, dysphoria, sedation, and altered perception (9). The intensity of euphoria/dysphoria varies with dose, administration route, and vehicle; expectations of effects; and the cannabis smoker’s environment and personality. Cannabis is associated with subjective physical discomfort and effort, as well as with lethargy (10). Acute cannabis intoxication produces dose-related impairment in cognitive and psychomotor functioning, and it can produce risk-taking behavior that can impair driving skills (11, 12). Dose refers to THC content in cannabis preparations in milligrams or micrograms per kilogram. Factors influencing dose include user experience, smoking topography, and cannabis THC concentration, all of which vary worldwide. Cannabis effects include alterations in reaction time (RT), perception, short-term memory, attention, motor skills, tracking, and skilled activities (13, 14).

Objective and Search Methods This review presents relevant published data and evaluates current knowledge of cannabis’ effects on driving. The electronic databases PubMed, Scopus, Web of Science, and Embase were searched through February 20, 2012, for the key words “cannabis”; “marijuana”; “automobile driving”; “accidents, traffic”; and “motor vehicles.” Additional articles were selected from references in identified sources.

Combined Alcohol and Cannabis Intake Cannabis and alcohol share some cognitive and psychomotor effects (10, 41, 68). Both are central nervous system depressants, and alcohol activates the cannabinoid CB1 receptor pathway (69); however, different effects on driving behavior were noted at the THC doses evaluated. Alcohol consumption led to faster driving (3), whereas the cannabis doses typically studied reduced driving speed. Alcohol inflates self-confidence, causing underestimation of impairment (10). In contrast, cannabis-influenced drivers occasionally appear more cautious in experimental settings. Alcohol and cannabis are commonly identified together in MVA victims. DUIC is more common among people who also drive drunk (70). Among 322 MVA victims, 30% of the THC-positive individuals had been drinking alcohol also (1). A larger French case control study found that >40% of 681 THC-positive drivers involved in fatal crashes had BACs above the 0.05% legal limit (37). Over a 90-day period, 30.6% of 108 drivers admitted to the University of Maryland Medical Center Shock Trauma Center tested positive for alcohol (93.5% with BAC values ≥0.07%); one third of the drivers also tested positive for cannabis (urinalysis, 50 ng/mL cutoff; analyte not specified) (23). Alcohol was detected with THC in nearly 20% of Swiss cases in which the THC concentration in blood exceeded the 2.2- ng/mL legal limit (45). Among 727 French drivers involved in fatal accidents with blood THC concentrations ≥1 ng/mL, 40% of the drivers also had an illegal BAC, ≥0.05% (20). Drunk driving (with or without cannabis) produced a higher single-vehicle accident incidence (62%) than did DUIC (34%). Drivers whose blood contained only cannabis were 2.3 times more likely to be culpable than those without cannabis or alcohol. This responsibility index (the percentage responsible divided by the percentage not responsible) increased to 9.4 for those with only alcohol in their blood, and to 14.1 with both alcohol and cannabis. THC-positive drivers with BAC values ≥0.05% had a culpability OR 2.9, relative to those with a BAC ≥0.05% alone (15), implying that THC enhanced alcohol’s impairing effects. In a case-controlled logistic regression analysis, patients in Ontario, Canada, who sought treatment for combined alcohol and cannabis abuse had a significantly higher likelihood of a prior conviction for driving while intoxicated (DWI) (OR, 3.65) relative to randomly chosen driver controls matched by age and sex (71). Cannabis-only patients were not significantly different from controls for DWI convictions, whereas alcohol-only patients had a prior DWI conviction OR of 5.19. DWI convictions were not necessarily concurrent with consumption of drug(s) for which the individuals were subsequently treated. A significant risk ratio of 5.8 for a driving-related injury within an hour after cannabis exposure (case-crossover self-report study) nearly doubled, to a 10.9 risk ratio for alcohol and cannabis combined (32). Four studies included laboratory data on alcohol and cannabis interactions ( ; see Table 5 in the online Data Supplement). In a time-estimation task, two 3.6% THC cigarettes (4 puffs each, 2 h apart) yielded underestimated time targets (56). Alcohol consumption [0.6 g/kg (male) and 0.5 g/kg (female)] produced overestimations. In combination, these effects canceled each other. Two of 3 studies showed a cannabis–alcohol interaction on DATs, suggesting this test was a sensitive measure. In occasional smokers (once to 4 times per month), some THC (13 mg) or alcohol (target BAC, 0.05%) impairment effects occurred 15–75 min after smoking (3). Although each substance increased false-alarm responses, the greatest effect occurred in combination. Performance impairment and subjective effects were generally strongest after consuming both drugs. Frequent smokers (≥4 days/week) showed increased control losses after 400 μg/kg THC and 0.05% and 0.07% BACs (63). Combinations produced the greatest effects, although whether alcohol and THC produced additive or synergistic effects was unclear. The percentage of drivers judged as impaired increased with increasing blood THC concentration and BAC (72). When neither alcohol (blood cutoff, 0.001%) nor THC (blood limit of detection, 0.2 ng/ mL) was detected, 14% of CTI observations showed impairment. Alcohol alone at BACs of 0.001%–0.05% (low) and >0.05% (high) was associated with 77% and 95% impairment, respectively. THC concentrations between 0.30 and 1.6 ng/mL were associated with 45%, 91%, and 97% impairment for 0, low, and high BACs, respectively. THC concentrations ≥1.6 ng/mL were associated with corresponding impairments of 53%, 93%, and 100%. These CTI data indicate progressive and increasing impairment with increasing alcohol and THC combinations. One simulator study showed a cannabis–alcohol interaction ( ). In occasional smokers (once to 4 times per month), a 0.05% target BAC and 13 mg smoked THC increased the SDLP relative to either drug alone or placebo, which did not differ (3). Alcohol alone increased drive speed relative to that for THC; THC alone decreased speed. The combination produced a borderline-significant speed increase relative to THC alone. No significant effect was observed for the speed SD. Alcohol and THC consumption increased the total number of collisions (5 of 12) relative to either drug alone (2 of 12 and 3 of 12 for alcohol and THC, respectively). The most straightforward cannabis–alcohol effect appeared in a study that administered 0, 100 μg/kg (approximately 7 mg), or 200 μg/kg (approximately 14 mg) THC and alcohol (target BACs, 0% or 0.04%) ( ) (59, 67). Alcohol plus the high THC dose increased the RT by 36%; this dosing condition was the only one that affected RT. Alcohol or the low THC dose alone slightly increased SDLP; the higher THC dose caused moderate impairment. Neither drug alone significantly increased the time out of lane. Combining either THC dose with alcohol severely increased SDLP and dose-dependently increased the time out of lane. Combining the 100- and 200-μg/kg doses with 0.04% BAC created a degree of impairment equivalent to that of 0.09% and 0.14% BAC, respectively. Visual search for traffic at intersections was significantly decreased by 3% relative to placebo for a 0.04% BAC and after consumption of 100 μg/kg THC, an effect not observed with either drug alone (4). Although several studies have reported additive or synergistic cannabis–alcohol effects, some studies reported no interactions. The inconsistencies were likely due to differences in procedures, outcome measures, and cannabis history for the study populations. After combining moderate drug doses in occasional smokers, no interaction effect was observed on free word recall, digit–symbol substitution, logical reasoning (56), standing steadiness, or equilibrium (56, 65). Frequent smokers did not show a cannabis–alcohol interaction in a Tower of London task, a stop-signal task, or CT after smoking 400 μg/kg (approximately 28 mg) THC and ingesting 0.05% or 0.07% BAC (63). A 3.3% (approximately 30 mg) THC cigarette decreased equilibrium scores, and 0.5 g/kg alcohol increased brake latency, with neither effect significantly altered with the combination (65). The authors speculated that the lack of interaction was an impairment-awareness artifact, coupled with the expectation of an “emergency.” A recent 9-session simulator experiment that investigated 0, 19, and 38 mg THC and 0, 0.4, and 0.6 g/kg alcohol in all possible combinations demonstrated substantial impairment caused by THC alone (both active doses) (53). Both alcohol doses increased SDLP; the lower alcohol dose also increased the speed mean and SD. No interaction effects were observed, most likely because the alcohol doses were low. The mean achieved BACs were 0%, 0.02%, and 0.05% for placebo, low alcohol, and high alcohol conditions, respectively.

Preventing DUIC One of the greatest challenges is dealing with public attitudes toward DUIC. One fourth (26.3%) of 320 drivers who smoked cannabis in the previous year indicated a >90% likelihood of future DUIC, even after having been shown data on increased crash risk (73). Only 7.5% reported they would be unlikely to drive (0%–10% likelihood). The majority indicated a >50% probability of future DUIC, even given the higher MVA risk. Regular smokers who had previously DUIC emphasized that publicity campaigns would not deter them from future DUIC (74). Past experience had convinced them that they could compensate for cannabis-associated performance decrements. Most believed cannabis caused minimal driving impairment; a few considered it to have no or even a positive effect on driving. A high likelihood of apprehension and punishment was a better deterrent. Given a hypothetical scenario with no chance of punishment, three quarters indicated a >50% chance for DUIC, and half indicated a >90% likelihood (73). In contrast, given a hypothetical scenario of a high degree of certainty of punishment, participants were significantly less willing to DUIC (OR, 0.2; P < 0.001). In a small study on DUIC attitudes, however, no one who reported having been stopped by police while DUIC indicated that they were deterred by this experience (none were charged) (74). Study findings suggested that random roadside testing (with arrest of those found cannabis positive) would be a better deterrent than advertising campaigns promoting the hazards of DUIC.

Conclusions/Discussion Many epidemiology studies have involved selection bias. Some evaluated only specific populations, such as deceased drivers or those being treated for substance abuse or addiction. Case control studies are highly useful, but they may be biased by the selection of controls. Case and control populations may come from different time periods or include different cannabis-detection cutoffs or matrices (e.g., blood analysis for killed drivers vs OF for living drivers). The accuracy of self-reported information varies, depending on the data-collection methods. Self-reported prevalence estimates are often underestimated, owing to the sensitivity of illicit drug-related information (27, 28). Even when objective measures of cannabis exposure were used, detection cutoffs were varied and not always reported. Urine testing has an extended cannabis-detection window and cannot establish a valid temporal association with crash risk. Several studies have shown increased crash and culpability risks, even after adjusting for such confounders as age, sex, risky behaviors, and polypharmacy. Increased blood THC concentrations and driving within an hour after smoking were strongly associated with higher crash and culpability risks. Human laboratory-controlled drug-administration studies showed THC-induced driving-performance decrements within the first hour that lasted ≥2 h after smoking, results that are largely consistent with epidemiologic data. Laboratory-based impairment experiments identified DATs and executive-function tasks as the most sensitive to cannabis’ effects. Investigations of actual driving performance have demonstrated dose-dependent THC impairment in road tracking, although only low to moderate THC doses were administered because of safety concerns. Simulator technology has improved since it was first used for impairment experiments, having progressed from rudimentary controls and a projected cyclorama (64) to full passenger cars, interactive screens with more complete fields of view, advanced driver monitoring via built-in cameras, realistic 3-dimensional audio output to enhance the simulated drive, and motion platforms that simulate physical driving sensations (10, 53, 55). Such advanced driving simulators are an ideal platform for future research because they combine realistic driving scenarios with highly controlled and measurable environments and provide a degree of safety not possible with on-road experiments. Driving simulators are particularly necessary when challenging drivers with difficult tasks (such as DATs and real-time decision-making processes) and when evaluating higher THC doses. Simulator studies from the last decade have demonstrated significant THC impairment of RT and the SDLP. THC smoking (22.9 and 38 mg) inhibited expected practice effects on DATs and produced deleterious performance effects, respectively (53, 55). Depending on the THC dose, driving speed may be reduced (3, 10, 53), particularly while multitasking (55), and headway may be increased (53). These results suggest impairment awareness and compensation but do not preclude control decrements. Inconsistencies in findings are likely due to differences in study design; the population and setting (simulator vs road); the sophistication of the equipment; the sensitivity and specificity of the tasks (including drive length); THC dosage; and time after smoking. Differences in driver compensation while under observation may contribute to the variability in results. Future work should focus on extended segments of monotonous driving (which draw drivers into a state of complacency or sleepiness) followed by sudden changes requiring reaction, realistic situations presenting decision dilemmas, and DATs. These constructs appear the most sensitive to THC’s impairing influence. Combining alcohol with THC exacerbated the observed effects, especially with respect to RT and SDLP. Low (100 μg/kg) and moderate (200 μg/kg) THC doses, combined with a 0.04% BAC produced road-tracking impairment to a degree similar to BACs of 0.09% and 0.14% (59). Because consuming alcohol and cannabis together is common, fully evaluating their combined impact on driving performance is essential. The use of clinically relevant THC and alcohol doses in future studies is necessary to generate findings that can better inform public policy. In previous research, the administration of low THC and alcohol doses often accounted for a lack of observed effects, at least in part. Cannabis smokers typically self-titrate doses, and alcohol drinkers consume enough alcohol to attain BACs ≥0.05%. Most self-administered cannabis and alcohol doses are higher than the doses administered in many research studies. Tolerance to acute impairment is an important consideration for future research and policy debates. DAT and tracking tasks have demonstrated impairment in chronic cannabis smokers, but other parameters have not (5, 63). The debate regarding per se and zero-tolerance drugged-driving laws is a prominent issue. Increased blood THC concentrations are strongly associated with increased crash risk, but there is no direct correlation between driving impairment and THC concentration. DUIC is an important public health and safety concern that requires the development of an evidence-based policy and legislation targeted at drugs and driving. Impaired driving endangers individuals inside and outside the vehicle. Consuming cannabis before driving, with or without alcohol, is a common occurrence that produces substantial morbidity and mortality on the roadway. Research is needed to further define cannabis’ effects on driving performance and to provide the scientific basis for laws to improve road safety.

Acknowledgments Role of Sponsor: The funding organizations played no role in the design of study, choice of enrolled patients, review and interpretation of data, or preparation or approval of manuscript. We thank A. White-Olson (NIH library) for assisting with the literature search and D.A. Gorelick, MD, PhD, for editorial assistance. We also acknowledge the Graduate Partnership Program, the NIH, and the University of Maryland Baltimore.