Health & Fit Fatal accidents involving drugs surpasses alcohol-related crashes: report
Getting Cocaine Delivered Is Faster Than A Pizza 30.3 percent of 15,000 surveyed around the world said they could get drugs delivered within half an hour. Cocaine can be delivered faster than takeout pizza in England and Scotland, according to a recent global drug survey.More than one third of cocaine users of the 1,000 that were surveyed in England and 500 in Scotland said they were able to get the illegal substance delivered within half an hour. A figure that places the two countries at fifth and sixth place on the global world ranking. drugs surpasses alcohol -associated crashes : report Fatal accidents involving drugs surpasses alcohol -associated crashes : report A nbsp(AP) A new report published Thursday discovered that fatal vehicle crashes involving marijuana, opioids and drug use have improved over the past. Traffic crashes were the leading cause of alcohol - related deaths and two-thirds of traffic deaths among persons aged 16 to 20 involved alcohol. At that time, preventive measures consisted primarily of efforts to reduce harm from alcohol by identifying and treating middle-aged individuals convicted of

© Provided by Fox News A report found there was an increase in fatal accidents involving marijuana and opioids in the past decade.

A new report published Thursday found that fatal car crashes involving marijuana, opioids and drug use have increased over the past decade and surpassed incidents related to alcohol.

The study by the Governor’s Highway Safety Association stated alcohol was involved in 38 percent of fatal accidents in 2016. Meanwhile, 44 percent of “fatally-injured drivers” tested positive for drugs, a statistic up 28 percent from 2006.

The report found that 38 percent of the drivers killed tested positive for marijuana, 16 percent were positive for opioids and 4 percent had a combination of both.

Alcohol, Tobacco Are Biggest Threats To Human Welfare, Report Finds

Despite the rise of drug epidemics, a new report found alcohol and tobacco continued to pose a bigger threat to human welfare across the globe. Alcohol, tobacco, and illicit drugs: Of these three options, which would you consider to be the greatest threat to human welfare? Surprisingly, illicit drug use is the wrong answer, according to a new report which combined data from the World Health Organization, United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, and the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation.

To reduce alcohol - related fatal crashes among youth, all States have adopted a minimum legal drinking Also see Drug -Impaired Driving. Driving a vehicle while impaired is a dangerous crime. Our programs have consistently reduced alcohol - related crash fatalities . We will continue until there The U.S. government does not track death rates for every drug . However, the National Center for Health Statistics at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention does collect information The CDC also has a searchable database, called CDC Wonder. The CDC's reporting on deaths by overdose.

“We definitely see states liberalizing marijuana laws. There are more prescriptions of drugs than ever before and we are in the midst of an opioid crisis,” Russ Martin, the director of government relations for the Governor’s Highway Safety Association, said.

Experts told CBS Philly it was difficult to determine and test if a driver was under the influence of drugs.

“Right now, we don’t have a nationally agreed upon way to test drivers for drug impairment similar to a breathalyzer or blood test for alcohol,” Martin said.

Officers were being trained on how to determine better if a driver could be under the influence of drugs to decrease the number of deaths.