Dronabinol Oral : Uses, Side Effects, Interactions, Pictures, Warnings & Dosing
Dronabinol is used to treat nausea and vomiting caused by cancer chemotherapy. It is used when other drugs usually used to control nausea and vomiting have not worked well. Dronabinol is also used to treat loss of appetite and weight loss in people with HIV infection. Dronabinol (also called THC) is a man-made form of a natural substance in marijuana.

How to use Dronabinol Solution

Read the Patient Information Leaflet and Instructions for Use if available from your pharmacist before you start taking dronabinol and each time you get a refill. If you have any questions, ask your doctor or pharmacist.

Take this medication by mouth as directed by your doctor, usually up to 4 to 6 times daily if you are taking it to control nausea and vomiting, or twice daily (1 hour before lunch and 1 hour before dinner) if you are taking it to treat loss of appetite. Drink a full glass of water (8 ounces/240 milliliters) right after taking each dose. Follow your doctor's instructions carefully.

Carefully measure the dose using a special measuring device/spoon. Do not use a household spoon because you may not get the correct dose.

The dosage is based on your medical condition and response to treatment. If you are taking this medication to control nausea and vomiting, your dosage may also be based on your body size.

Do not increase your dose or use this drug more often or for longer than prescribed. Your condition will not improve any faster, and your risk of serious side effects will increase.

If you suddenly stop using this medication, you may have withdrawal symptoms (such as irritability, trouble sleeping, restlessness, hot flashes, diarrhea). To help prevent withdrawal, your doctor may lower your dose slowly. Withdrawal is more likely if you have used dronabinol for a long time or in high doses. Tell your doctor or pharmacist right away if you have withdrawal.

Though it helps many people, this medication may sometimes cause addiction. This risk may be higher if you have a substance use disorder (such as overuse of or addiction to drugs/alcohol). Take this medication exactly as prescribed to lower the risk of addiction. Ask your doctor or pharmacist for more details.

Tell your doctor if your condition does not get better or if it gets worse.