How Many People Have Died From Weed?
Has Anyone Ever Died From Marijuana?

A German study published in Forensic Science International in February 2014 is the first known documented case of somebody dying from marijuana use alone, other than car accidents in which marijuana was implicated, or polydrug use.

Other research on marijuana deaths:

Researchers found the drug was to blame in two isolated cases out of 15 analyzed, in two seemingly healthy people, aged 23 and 28.

Autopsies revealed the younger man had a serious undetected heart problem, suggesting people with cardiovascular issues should be aware of marijuana risks, and the older man had a history of alcohol and drug use.

“To our knowledge, these are the first cases of suspected fatal cannabis intoxications where full post-mortem investigations … were carried out,” study researchers wrote. “After exclusion of other causes of death we assume that the young men experienced fatal cardiovascular complications evoked by smoking cannabis.”

Can You Die of Cannabis Poisoning?

In late January 2014, British media reported the tragic death of a 31-year-old mother of three named Gemma Moss, who reportedly “died as a result of cannabis poisoning.” Here are the details:

Medical science was skeptical that marijuana was the cause of death.

Moss was reportedly a pot smoker for many years, had stopped using two years before her death, but recently began smoking just half a joint at night to help her fall asleep.

Although no organ damage was found during her autopsy, medical examiners suggested she may have suffered cardiac arrest triggered by what they deemed “moderate to high” levels of the drug in her system. The BBC reported she suffered from “cannabis poisoning” but the findings were controversial.

Medical Marijuana Doctor’s Take on The Moss Case

“There’s been no history of any verified reports of a death from cannabis ever,” said Dr. Alan Shackelford, a high-profile, Harvard-trained Colorado physician who evaluates individuals for medical marijuana prescriptions. He questioned the medical examiner’s diagnosis when interviewed about this case.

“Cannabis can cause an increased heart rate, and there’s a possibility that it could cause a problem with someone with a pre-existing heart disease – for example, somebody with an elevated heart rate. But there’s no known dose of cannabis that could kill a human.”