Is it true that smoking weed kills human sperm? Why?
Semen is stored in cryofreezers. After thawing, the count and mobility is measured. The number of cells that die in the thawing process is in hundreds of thousands to millions per ml, and the amount below which your sperm count is said to be low is 15 million; even if just 750,000 cells die during the thawing process, 5% is rather large for a margin for error.

10% of samples do not endure supercool temperatures like those experienced in the cryopreservation process. This has nothing to do with sperm count or mobility; the samples just don't get through the procedure, and the cause is unknown.

The sperm count is a minimum of 70% higher if obtained as a result of intercourse rather than masturbation, and again, there's no idea as to why. Visual stimulation could hold a possible correlation, but, (unlike the buffoons who undertook this study) we will bear in mind that correlation does not have to imply causation .

. Regular exposure to higher than ideal temperatures reduces the ability of the testes to produce spermatozoa, such as using a hot laptop on the lap near the groin area, regular sauna use, and regular long, hot showers, but it is not known if these changes are permanent, nor the time it takes after stopping these activities for the sperm count to come back to optimum levels if the changes are reversible.

Nowhere in the study does it mention the number of semen samples collected from each men to obtain more accurate values. If it was just 1 semen sample, then this study is as good as useless. If it was 2, it's slightly better, but frankly, given the above limitations of semen analyses, anything under 3 is not even worth studying. The controls may be a matched (similar to those known to have a condition (on what grounds, nobody knows)) or may be an un-matched random sample from the unaffected population. Here, the problems of controlling for unknown influences is present, but not only that; if the controls are too closely matched they may not be representative of the general population. The study found that of the samples taken, about 20% of the samples had abnormal sperm mobility. Of these that had abnormal sperm mobility, the common factors found amongst them were that: most of them were under 30, most of them had consumed marijuana at least once in the last 3 months, and that the samples taken in the summer had a lower count and mobility. Does this mean that if you're under 30, or if you've smoked pot in the last 3 months, or if it's summer time, you will have a lower sperm count? Absolutely NOT. Why not? First of all, this breaks one standard statistical rule: correlation does NOT have to imply causation. Just because most of those taken with a low sperm count were under 30, does NOT mean that if you're under 30 you will have a low sperm count. Just because most of the samples taken smoked pot 3 months before their test does NOT mean that if you smoke pot you will have low sperm levels for the next 3 months. Secondly, 3 months is a long time. Any number of things could have happened in that time that affect the sperm count.

This misconception is spread by a very, very poorly conducted study.TL;DR version:The study found that of the samples taken, about 20% of the samples had abnormal sperm mobility. Of these that had abnormal sperm mobility, the common factors found amongst them were that: most of them were under 30, most of them had consumed marijuana at least once in the last 3 months, and that the samples taken in the summer had a lower count and mobility. Does this mean that if you're under 30, or if you've smoked pot in the last 3 months, or if it's summer time, you will have a lower sperm count?Why not? First of all, this breaks one standard statistical rule: correlation does NOT have to imply causation. Just because most of those taken with a low sperm count were under 30, does NOT mean that if you're under 30 you will have a low sperm count. Just because most of the samples taken smoked pot 3 months before their test does NOT mean that if you smoke pot you will have low sperm levels for the next 3 months. Secondly, 3 months is a long time. Any number of things could have happened in that time that affect the sperm count.----If you are a scientific analysis freak and you want the full info as to why this study is such bollocks, here we go...This is a case-referrent study - a type of study that literally has control over almost no external variables.There are two things that make this study ludicrous, and that is the limitation of semen analyses, as well as the poor scientific procedure followed by this study.Here's a fact that strains the credibility of almost any test done based on a semen analyses. Semen analyses are limited in terms of accuracy. This is due to many reasons. Just a handful:The list goes on and on, and if there's one test of the human body that is bloody unreliable and has not just margins for error, but rather significant fractions for error, it's the semen analyses. However, accepting and ignoring those limitations as the best we've got and moving on, the team involved in this experiment followed extremely poor scientific method. Here's why.Just as an added point, this result was found by 0 other researches - absolutely none. However, this study apparently came to the conclusion that smoking tobacco and alcohol consumption had no noticeable effect on sperm count. However, several other studies, better conducted, suggest that smoking cigarettes and alcohol consumption affected sperm count. Go figure.Anyone who wants the sources, I'll be happy to provide them.