Alcohol poisoning - Symptoms and causes
Overview

Alcohol poisoning is a serious — and sometimes deadly — consequence of drinking large amounts of alcohol in a short period of time. Drinking too much too quickly can affect your breathing, heart rate, body temperature and gag reflex and potentially lead to a coma and death.

Alcohol poisoning can also occur when adults or children accidentally or intentionally drink household products that contain alcohol.

A person with alcohol poisoning needs immediate medical attention. If you suspect someone has alcohol poisoning, call for emergency medical help right away.

Symptoms

Alcohol poisoning signs and symptoms include:

Confusion

Vomiting

Seizures

Slow breathing (less than eight breaths a minute)

Irregular breathing (a gap of more than 10 seconds between breaths)

Blue-tinged skin or pale skin

Low body temperature (hypothermia)

Passing out (unconsciousness) and can't be awakened

When to see a doctor

It's not necessary to have all the above signs or symptoms before you seek medical help. A person with alcohol poisoning who is unconscious or can't be awakened is at risk of dying.

Alcohol poisoning is an emergency

If you suspect that someone has alcohol poisoning — even if you don't see the classic signs and symptoms — seek immediate medical care. Here's what to do:

Call 911 or your local emergency number immediately. Never assume the person will sleep off alcohol poisoning.

or your local emergency number immediately. Never assume the person will sleep off alcohol poisoning. Be prepared to provide information. If you know, be sure to tell hospital or emergency personnel the kind and amount of alcohol the person drank, and when.

If you know, be sure to tell hospital or emergency personnel the kind and amount of alcohol the person drank, and when. Don't leave an unconscious person alone. Because alcohol poisoning affects the way the gag reflex works, someone with alcohol poisoning may choke on his or her own vomit and not be able to breathe. While waiting for help, don't try to make the person vomit because he or she could choke.

Because alcohol poisoning affects the way the gag reflex works, someone with alcohol poisoning may choke on his or her own vomit and not be able to breathe. While waiting for help, don't try to make the person vomit because he or she could choke. Help a person who is vomiting. Try to keep him or her sitting up. If the person must lie down, make sure to turn his or her head to the side — this helps prevent choking. Try to keep the person awake to prevent loss of consciousness.

Don't be afraid to get help

It can be difficult to decide if you think someone is drunk enough to warrant medical intervention, but it's best to err on the side of caution. You may worry about the consequences for yourself or your friend or loved one, particularly if you're underage. But the consequences of not getting the right help in time can be far more serious.

Causes

Alcohol in the form of ethanol (ethyl alcohol) is found in alcoholic beverages, mouthwash, cooking extracts, some medications and certain household products. Ethyl alcohol poisoning generally results from drinking too many alcoholic beverages, especially in a short period of time.

Other forms of alcohol — including isopropyl alcohol (found in rubbing alcohol, lotions and some cleaning products) and methanol or ethylene glycol (a common ingredient in antifreeze, paints and solvents) — can cause other types of toxic poisoning that require emergency treatment.

Binge drinking

A major cause of alcohol poisoning is binge drinking — a pattern of heavy drinking when a male rapidly consumes five or more alcoholic drinks within two hours, or a female rapidly consumes at least four drinks within two hours. An alcohol binge can occur over hours or last up to several days.

You can consume a fatal dose before you pass out. Even when you're unconscious or you've stopped drinking, alcohol continues to be released from your stomach and intestines into your bloodstream, and the level of alcohol in your body continues to rise.

How much is too much?

Unlike food, which can take hours to digest, alcohol is absorbed quickly by your body — long before most other nutrients. And it takes a lot more time for your body to get rid of the alcohol you've consumed. Most alcohol is processed (metabolized) by your liver.

The more you drink, especially in a short period of time, the greater your risk of alcohol poisoning.

One drink is defined as:

12 ounces (355 milliliters) of regular beer (about 5 percent alcohol)

8 to 9 ounces (237 to 266 milliliters) of malt liquor (about 7 percent alcohol)

5 ounces (148 milliliters) of wine (about 12 percent alcohol)

1.5 ounces (44 milliliters) of 80-proof hard liquor (about 40 percent alcohol)

Mixed drinks may contain more than one serving of alcohol and take even longer to metabolize.

Risk factors

A number of factors can increase your risk of alcohol poisoning, including:

Your size and weight

Your overall health

Whether you've eaten recently

Whether you're combining alcohol with other drugs

The percentage of alcohol in your drinks

The rate and amount of alcohol consumption

Your tolerance level

Complications

Severe complications can result from alcohol poisoning, including:

Choking. Alcohol may cause vomiting. Because it depresses your gag reflex, this increases the risk of choking on vomit if you've passed out.

Alcohol may cause vomiting. Because it depresses your gag reflex, this increases the risk of choking on vomit if you've passed out. Stopping breathing. Accidentally inhaling vomit into your lungs can lead to a dangerous or fatal interruption of breathing (asphyxiation).

Accidentally inhaling vomit into your lungs can lead to a dangerous or fatal interruption of breathing (asphyxiation). Severe dehydration. Vomiting can result in severe dehydration, leading to dangerously low blood pressure and fast heart rate.

Vomiting can result in severe dehydration, leading to dangerously low blood pressure and fast heart rate. Seizures. Your blood sugar level may drop low enough to cause seizures.

Your blood sugar level may drop low enough to cause seizures. Hypothermia. Your body temperature may drop so low that it leads to cardiac arrest.

Your body temperature may drop so low that it leads to cardiac arrest. Irregular heartbeat. Alcohol poisoning can cause the heart to beat irregularly or even stop.

Alcohol poisoning can cause the heart to beat irregularly or even stop. Brain damage. Heavy drinking may cause irreversible brain damage.

Heavy drinking may cause irreversible brain damage. Death. Any of the issues above can lead to death.

Prevention

To avoid alcohol poisoning: