Shopping in Stockholm
Drottninggatan in Stockholm is choc-a-bloc with small specialist shops, big stores like H&M and Zara, Swedish fashion brand stores and just about every type of retailer imaginable. Look out for Designtorget at Sergels Torg; it sells household design/functional objects mostly created by up and coming Nordic designers that you are unlikely to find anywhere else.

If you are more into high-end shopping you should really visit Biblioteksgatan (map), between the squares of Stureplan and Norrmalmstorg. Here you will find luxury brands like Gucci, Prada, Marc Jacobs, Michel Kors and much more. You will also find some Swedish fashion labels like Acne, Whyred, Hope and Tiger of Sweden.

NK – Nordiska Kompaniet

NK department store on Hamngatan in the City area is where Stockholm’s well-heeled shop. Occupying four floors of one of Stockholms most imposing buildings, NK is a class act and stylishly fills its space with Swedish and international fashion, designer and household goodies, cosmetics, shoes etc. Go to the basement here for uniquely Swedish and Nordic artglass, crystalware and kitchenware. Well-known Swedish preppy unisex mainstays such as Gant and J. Lindeberg are here, as well Scandi favourites Fillipa K. Acne and Tiger.

Opening hours

Weekdays: 10 - 20 (10 a.m - 8 p.m)

Saturdays: 10 - 18 (10 a.m - 6 p.m)

Sundays: 11 - 17 (11 a.m - 5 p.m)

Please check the opening hours on NK's own homepage before your visit.

Åhléns department store

Åhléns Stockholm City is at the intersection of Drottninggatan and Hamngatan and is one of those department stores that sells absolutely everything – from a bar of soap, to designer artglass. Åhléns is big in international and Swedish brand fashion, beauty and cosmetic products. Check out their own brand household goods for excellent quality and price. And lucky you – Åhléns is open until 9.00 every week day.

If you'd like to visit another of Åhléns department stores you can find the closest here: Åhléns department stores

Mood

MOOD Stockholm opened in mars 2012 and has quickly achieved a status as the natural meeting spot, both for the stockholmers and for tourists from all over the world. In the vibrant and vivid environment you can shop, hangout and work during most hours of the day. MOOD Stockholm is quite simply a enjoyable and modern city within the city.

Opening hours

Weekdays: 10 - 19 (10 a.m - 7 p.m)

Saturdays: 10 - 18 (10 a.m - 6 p.m)

Sundays: 11 - 17 (11 a.m - 5 p.m)

Double check the opening hours on MOOD Stockholm's own homepage before visiting!

MOOD is Stockholm’s newest shopping mall. It is the home to a varied selection of boutiques and restaurants. Photo: Tuukka Ervasti/imagebank.sweden.se



Mall of Scandinavia

Mall of Scandinavia opened in November 2015 and it is the second largest mall in the Nordic countries with around 174 stores, 41 restaurants and with Swedens very first IMAX Theatre with 500 seats. You will find the very best in fashion, sports and beauty, interior design and technology all under one roof here. Mall of Scandinavia is located near the Solna commuter rail station, only two stations from Stockholm Central Station (T-Centralen) in Stockholm City and approximately seven minutes from the Stockholm city centre.

Opening hours from 10.00 a.m until 9.00 p.m - every day of the week.