Purchasing medications from a supplier outside the U.S.
What are the regulations for mail-order purchases from a medical supplier outside the U.S.?

The Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FD&C) prohibits persons from importing into the United States any prescription drug that has not been approved for sale by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), or which is adulterated or misbranded within the meaning of the Act. Moreover, in those instances where a U.S. manufacturer makes an FDA-approved prescription drug and sends it abroad, the Act also prohibits any person other than the original manufacturer from importing the drug back into the U.S. Thus, in virtually all instances, individual citizens are prohibited from importing prescription drugs into the U.S.

Pharmaceutical shipments discovered in the inbound international express stream or international mail by Customs and Border Protection (CBP) are referred to the FDA for their examination. If you have ordered prescription drugs from an overseas source, and have been told by either the courier service or post office that they are being held at CBP, you should contact the FDA about the status of the shipment. FDA 1-888-723-3366.

Food and Drug Administration

Division of Import Operations - Policy

12420 Parklawn Drive, ELEM-Rm 3109

Rockville, Maryland 20857



CBP does not track these packages and we are unable to tell you whether or not your individual package has been referred to FDA for inspection. FDA is responsible for all pharmaceutical admissibility determinations.

If you have any questions as to whether a specific pharmaceutical may be imported into the U.S., please visit the FDA Web site. If you would like information about importing controlled substances which are on the Drug Enforcement Administration's (DEA) schedule of controlled substances 2-5, you may contact DEA's Office of Diversion Control, International Drug Unit, at 1-800-882-9539. This is also the office to call if you have questions about the law allowing limited importations of not more than 50 dosage units by U.S. residents through our Mexican or Canadian land borders.

If you wish to receive automatic updates to this Q&A, select "Subscribe to Updates" on the left side of this screen.