Methods For Marketing Drugs Are Changing. Here’s What That Means For The Pharma Industry
Just a few decades ago, the consumer’s voice didn’t matter much in the pharma industry. Patients had little influence — a doctor was the sole arbiter of what drug was prescribed for an illness.

And when that drug was chosen, it didn’t matter how much it actually cost because insurance would pay for it.

Now, patient involvement is changing. People are spending more than ever on copays, and naturally, they’re becoming more aware of the process.

The other day, I watched in CVS as I was getting some antibiotics for my kid. In the line in front of me, there was only one person whose purchases cost less than the copay for the drug he was getting.

That is a marked change from a few years ago.

This shift in consumer recognition demands a change in the way the drug industry markets and interacts with consumers. It’s no longer a one-way relationship — patients are making decisions about medications that they didn’t have to in the past.

This will fundamentally change drug marketing over the next decade:

As the price of pharmaceuticals increases, so does people’s involvement in the industry.

One sure-fire way to get people to pay attention to something is by having them spend a lot of money on it.

The higher the number on the cash register, the more likely you are to investigate whether you’re getting your money’s worth. That’s exactly what’s happening in pharma right now. Drugs that used to be covered entirely by insurance now require a $30 copay.

When people see the cost of a medication competing with groceries in their monthly budget, they begin to take stock. They start weighing the pros and cons of the drug, and whether they can live without it.

Consciously or not, consumers are making choices about their medications in a way they weren’t in the past. You can hear the dialogue increase substantially in everyday chatter.

Credit: iStock

Drug companies have to recognize their flaws and work to better understand consumers.

Right now, drug companies don’t operate the same way that consumer companies do.

Think of business such as Google or Proctor & Gamble — they deploy certain advertising that aims to educate and draw in consumers.

Some of this lack of marketing is due to regulation, and some of it is due to societal distaste for the idea of pushing drugs on the public. As a result, there isn’t a lot of compelling information in a consumer-friendly manner about drug companies and their products.

Nobody has the jingle of a medication ad on their mind.

Instead, people see the bad apples. They see Martin Shkreli jacking up the price of a decades-old anti-infection drug. They see Heather Bresch raising the price of EpiPens to five times the traditional price, then applauding a lower-priced version that only tripled the cost.

Drug companies are going to have to start showing consumers the value of the products they’re using.

So when a drug is initially priced very high, they have to be able to communicate that the cost is going towards recouping R&D investments, and that when the patent runs out, the price will be significantly less. Keep in mind that though the drug may have a high cost now, it will be practically free for your kids.

Companies have to communicate these benefits and present the long-term advantage.

That’s not something the pharma industry has done before. But ten years from now, biotech and pharma are going to look much more like a consumer business than they currently do.

Marketing must evolve to educate customers and help explain the benefits of the drugs.

We already have plenty of drug advertising. Watch any TV show aimed at an older demographic, and you’ll notice that practically every other commercial is promoting a medication.

The problem with this approach is that there are limits on what can be shown in these commercials. The information on these drugs is out there, but most people won’t — or can’t — look through an FDA label carefully to determine whether a drug is right for them.

And many doctors feel the average person is easily influenced when they don’t have the right information.

Marketing to the consumer is going to increase substantially because drug companies will have to explain the pros and cons of a drug better than an FDA label can.

Doctors may not like it, but the consumer is now being forced to become a part of this decision. And consumers need the proper information and tools to make a choice.

Soon enough, the industry will have to strike a balance between giving people the right amount of information and presenting it in a way that will help them pay attention long enough to absorb what they need to know to stay healthy.