Cost of a Defibrillator
Medium: $1,200-$2,500



An automatic external defibrillator or AED is a lifesaving computerized device that checks an individual's heart rhythm and delivers a shock when the rhythm is abnormal or absent. The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services recommends that federal agencies, other public entities and large businesses or corporations purchase a portable AED to keep on site. In 2004, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved one type of AED for use at home. Typical costs:

An AED or automatic external defibrillator costs between $1,200 and $2,500, according to the American Heart Association [1] and the State of New Hampshire [2] . The cost varies based on the features of the AED, which can include voiced instructions or the ability to perform an EKG, a test that measures heart function, during use.

and according to the American Heart Association and the State of New Hampshire . The cost varies based on the features of the AED, which can include voiced instructions or the ability to perform an EKG, a test that measures heart function, during use. There is only one AED that is FDA-approved for home use because of the ease of use. The Philips HeartStart Home Defibrillator [3] sells for $1,270 and $1,565 .

sells for and . Pads, which administer the electrical current, are necessary to operate the AED. Adult AED pads, which are typically included with an AED purchase, are only recommended for use on individuals who are eight years of age or older and weigh at least 55 pounds. There are pediatric pads available for $30 to $200 .

to . Except in rare cases, insurance companies do not cover the purchase of an AED for home or personal use. The Sudden Arrhythmia Death Syndromes Foundation[4] offers tips for individuals seeking an exception in their insurance coverage. Those who do obtain insurance coverage will pay typical copays and coinsurance rates from $50 to $1,500. Related articles: Blood Pressure Monitor, Heart Rate Monitor





What should be included:

Most AED packages include the actual device, a battery and one set of adult defibrillator pads. Instructions for use should be printed on the actual AED device. Some AED devices provide verbal instructions for use and some AED have a digital screen that provides instructions and other information.

Each AED package typically includes only one set of adult-size pads. The pads, which deliver the electrical shock, are connected the device and to the patient. The AED approved for at-home use, the Philips HeartStart Home Defibrillator, includes the defibrillator device, one adult-size pad set, a four-year lithium battery and a five-year warranty. Additional costs:

The Bureau of Emergency Medical Services recommends that one person associated with the business or organization receive at least four hours of training when an AED is onsite for public use. Experts also recommend that individuals purchasing a home AED undergo training as well. Training can range from an online, self-directed course to four hours of formal classroom training, and can be free or cost more than $1,000 depending upon the complexity of the device and the number of people trained. Contact a local American Red Cross [5] or American Heart Association [6] chapter to inquire about training opportunities.

depending upon the complexity of the device and the number of people trained. Contact a local American Red Cross or American Heart Association chapter to inquire about training opportunities. Batteries are required to operate an AED. According to the U.S. Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs, replacement batteries cost about $150 per year. Discounts:

There are grants available to assist organizations and other nonprofit groups purchasing an AED. Begin by contacting the Department of Homeland Security in your state. If your organization is located in a rural area, you may be able to obtain grant funding through the The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

Funding for an AED purchase may also be available through your state department of health[7] . Shopping for a defibrillator:

The only AED approved for home use can be purchased without a prescription. The Philips HeartStart Home Defibrillator can be found online, at a health equipment supply store or sometimes at a local Wal-Mart. Beware of any company marketing a different AED for at-home use.

To purchase any other type of AED, see a physician. When setting up an AED program, the American Heart Association [8] suggests having an administering physician available who can provide guidance on use, training and placement.

suggests having an administering physician available who can provide guidance on use, training and placement. Contact a local American Red Cross [9] or American Heart Association [10] chapter for advice regarding AED purchase. AEDHQ.com offers customers an AED buying guide.

or American Heart Association chapter for advice regarding AED purchase. AEDHQ.com offers customers an AED buying guide. When purchasing pediatric pads, make sure they're compatible with the specific AED. The retail website, AEDHQ.com allows users to find compatible pads. Talk with a physician about how and when to use an AED on a child.

Material on this page is for informational purposes only and should not be construed as medical advice. Always consult your physician or pharmacist regarding medications or medical procedures.









What People Are Paying - Recent Comments







Comment On Your Experience With a Defibrillator Subject: * Amount Spent: * Manual or Automatic: Brand: Comments: Purchased: --- Select --- January February March April May June July August September October November December Year: 2019 2018 2017 2016 2015 2014 2013 2012 2011 2010 or earlier City: * State: --Select-- AL AK AZ AR CA CO CT DE DC FL GA HI ID IL IN IA KS KY LA ME MD MA MI MN MS MO MT NE NV NH NJ NM NY NC ND OH OK OR PA RI SC SD TN TX UT VT VA WA WV WI WY Other * Information about you: Email: * Email addresses are not displayed. Name: This is the name we'll display with your post. Remember me on this computer *=required field.





External Resources: