Liver Transplant: The Gift of Life
The Transplant Process

A liver transplant is a major surgery with an operation lasting between six and eight hours. As with any major medical procedure, liver transplantation has risks. These risks along with the benefits are carefully considered before a patient is placed on a waiting list for a new organ. A successful outcome depends upon many factors. Patients who enter surgery very ill carry a higher risk of dying. Similarly, older patients with cardiac or respiratory illnesses will find the transplant a greater challenge.

When medical therapy is effective in stopping the progression of liver disease, transplantation may be avoided or delayed. If a patient develops advanced disease, with impaired liver function, which is non-reversible, liver transplantation should be considered. Liver transplantation is not suitable for everyone, so all potential transplant patients must be carefully assessed. The assessment starts when the specialist or family doctor makes a referral to the transplant team. Patients receive a comprehensive medical evaluation which includes various tests and interviews by various team members to determine whether transplantation is the best treatment option. The patient and/or family members are extensively involved in the transplant assessment and decision-making process.

The waiting time for a new liver may be uncertain and stressful. The sickest patients receive priority for a transplant. Prioritization is based on severity of the liver disease measured by a Model for End-stage Liver Disease score (MELD). In children, a modified scoring system, called Pediatric End-stage Liver disease score (PELD), is used to prioritize children in need of a liver transplant. If patients and families are having difficulty in coping during this time, it is recommended that they seek the assistance of a qualified health professional.

For more information please contact the Canadian Liver Foundation’s National Help Line at 1 (800) 563-5483.

Living with a Transplant

In Canada, the long-term success rate of transplantation for both adults and children is over 80%. Immediately after surgery, patients are taken to the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) where they are placed on a machine known as a mechanical ventilator that supports their breathing. They are carefully monitored for signs of infection. Frequent tests are conducted to assess the functioning of the new liver. Most patients spend one to three days in the ICU before they are transferred to a step-down transplant unit. At this point, they are able to breathe on their own but will continue to have intravenous lines delivering medication. Following continued improvement and physiotherapy, patients usually leave the hospital after 10 to 14 days. They will be required to remain close to the transplant centre for several weeks and will attend an outpatient clinic for continued monitoring of their new liver. Most patients return to a good quality of life within three to six months after surgery.