How To Spot A Troll (And Defeat Them)
Many of us have been there. You’re engaged in an interesting conversation on a forum, when suddenly, the rudest, most abrasive, off-the-topic person appears out of nowhere.

These obnoxious types are known as trolls, and they seem determined to create discord and goad everyone into a hissy fit. They also aim to throw everyone off with their comments, GIFs, images, or video content.

Sometimes, the information they spread can truly rattle you, and you just wish you can prove they're not for real. If that’s you, look no further, because TruthFinder’s Deep Web search will help you ascertain whether their identity is legitimate or not. Here’s the A-Z on trolls.

How To Spot A Troll

Internet trolls do what they do for varying reasons. There’s the self-centered spammer troll, whose primary reason for trolling is to promote their website, eBooks, links, or other promotional material.

Then you get the cussing troll, who does nothing but use expletives in capital letters. As abrasive as these may seem, boredom is usually the reasoning behind this, although you should never takes threats lightly.

The egotistic troll loves to share their opinion, even though they may not have the slightest interest in the topic at hand. These are basically the types who love to show off and appear intelligent. You’ll spot them with their lengthy know-it-all explanations.

Have you ever been online and experienced a barrage of hateful remarks and insults? If so, you’ve been attacked by the hater troll, whose primary goal is to insult everyone who crosses their path.

Excessive debates and the need to be right could also indicate that you have a troll in your midst.

Outsmart A Troll

According to Forbes, creating a policy for user comments is ideal, as it lays down the law as to what types of comments are allowed. The Huffington Post is one such platform, where a concrete commentary policy is in place.

You may also assign moderators to your website that have the authority to delete troll-like comments and ban users who don’t adhere to your rules.

Having a webmaster worth their salt also comes in handy here, as they could block IP addresses linked to troll attacks and use blacklists and white lists to separate the trolls from your legitimate audience. You could also warn trolls that you are going to report their IP address, as they hate being exposed.

Trolls thrive on attention, and their primary objective is to get everyone emotionally charged. If you ignore or avoid arguing with them, they would simply run out of steam.

You may also ask them for supporting data, such as domain names or email addresses, which could be very easily confirmed. If they provide these to back up their claims and you cannot verify them, you could simply oust them on the public forum.

Use the information a troll has given you on TruthFinder’s Deep Web search. You’ll quickly determine if their identity is real or not. You may then decide if you want to ignore, ban, or report them.

Comments

DISCLAIMER: It is PROHIBITED by law to use our service or the information it provides to make decisions about consumer credit, employment, insurance, tenant screening, or for any other purpose subject to the Fair Credit Reporting Act, 15 USC 1681 et seq. TruthFinder does not provide consumer reports and is not a consumer reporting agency. The information available on our website may not be 100% accurate, complete, or up to date, so do not use this information as a substitute for your own due dilligence, especially if you have concerns about a person’s criminal history. TruthFinder does not make any representation or warranty about the accuracy of the information available through our website or about the character or integrity of the person about whom you inquire. For more information, please review TruthFinder Terms of Use.