Fact check | Trump: Three Border Patrol agents ‘badly hurt.’ Border Patrol chief: No agent ‘seriously injured.’
Monday night, President Donald Trump claimed three Border Patrol agents had been “very badly hurt” Sunday by rocks and stones thrown by migrants massing at the U.S.-Mexico border south of San Diego.

San Diego’s chief Border Patrol agent Rodney Scott had directly contradicted that in an interview earlier in the day.

The San Ysidro Port of Entry was closed for five hours Sunday after hundreds of the Central American migrants who have been arriving in Tijuana to seek asylum in recent weeks rushed toward the border, in an apparent attempt to make it to the U.S. side. Some migrants threw rocks, and U.S. Customs and Border Protection officers responded with tear gas to disrupt the crowds.

San Diego’s chief Border Patrol agent Rodney Scott went on CNN on Monday to discuss agents’ response.

While Trump would later say in Mississippi on Monday that three Border Patrol agents were “very badly hurt through getting hit with rocks and stones,” Scott said almost the exact opposite.

“Their shields and their bullet proof vests actually protected them from the rocks,” he said. “We did have a few vehicles that were damaged, some windows and quite a few dents, but none of the agents were seriously injured.”

Here are a few other points Scott raised in explaining how U.S. Customs and Border Protection responded.

On whether any migrants made it across the border:

“To be completely frank, there were numerous people that actually made it across the border. We’re in the process of building the new border wall* here, but we don’t have it completed.

*Editor’s note: Actually, what’s under construction along the border is mostly replacement of existing border fencing, as reported this month by the Arizona Republic. As it reported on Nov. 5, “none of the new barriers use the designs that emerged from the construction of prototype ‘walls’ in San Diego.”

There were some sections that had the dilapidated border wall that was made out of scrap metal the military gave us. The group breached a couple sections of that, actually tore down one small section, started to rush across and that’s another time they started assaulting our agents. We were able to hold them back using riot techniques. But there were ultimately *42 arrests of individuals, and again, as I mentioned, the vast majority of those were adult males.”

*Editor’s note: Kevin McAleenan, commissioner of U.S. Customs and Border Protection, said that 69 migrants who managed to cross the border on Sunday were being processed and could face criminal charges related to illegal entry and assaults on agents.

On whether the migrants at the border are really asylum seekers:

“I do not believe that is true. I believe there are definitely people in that group that are going to try to claim asylum. The vast majority of those, from what we call the northern triangle, are economic migrants, though. They do not meet the qualifications to get asylum here. They can still apply. That’s a different issue. However, what I saw at on the border (Sunday) was not people walking up to Border Patrol agents and asking to claim asylum. Matter of fact, one of the groups that I watched — one of the groups that actually, several of them were arrested — they passed 10 or 15 marked Border Patrol units walking west to east, numerous uniformed personnel. They were chanting, waving the Honduran flag and throwing rocks at the agents. If they were truly asylum seekers, they would have just walked up with their hands up and surrendered and that did not take place.”

On the use of tear gas on women and children:

“When the threat is to our personnel or to protect others, you’ve got to do what you’ve got to do. What I find unconscionable is that people would intentionally take children into this situation. What we saw over and over (Sunday) was that the group, the ‘caravan’ as we call them, would push women and children toward the front and then begin basically rocking our agents. So there’s different types of tools we use, different types of CS (gas) deployment. We try to target specifically the instigators, specifically the person assaulting the agent, but as you saw from the video, once that chemical is released it does go through the air. I was in an area where I actually inhaled quite a bit of it (Sunday) as well. That’s what’s going to happen in those situations.”

Email: abby.hamblin@sduniontribune.com

Twitter: @abbyhamblin

ALSO

Arrests, deportations and rising complaints follow Sunday's border shutdown

If Trump closes the border, regional economy could suffer 'catastrophic losses'

Facing no way into U.S., some caravan members head home