The Woman Behind the Fetus
Today the fetus is viewed almost as a freestanding individual, while women have all but disappeared. Consider the misleading way we have come to visualize a fetus: as a sort of larval angel, suspended against a neutral background. But no fetus -no living fetus - is suspended anywhere, but anchored to the placenta, housed in the womb, and wrapped in the flesh of a living woman.

Or consider the anti-choice film, ''The Silent Scream,'' which purported to show a fetus struggling to resist being aborted. Undoubtedly the abortion in the film took place somewhere, i.e., in the uterus of an actual woman, but the narration never referred to the setting in human terms - only as ''the sanctuary.''

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You will receive emails containing news content , updates and promotions from The New York Times. You may opt-out at any time. You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Still, the anguished and ambivalent ask how do we know that the fetus is not a person? Might not science eventually be able to pinpoint the moment when a fetus achieves personhood?

But science has nothing to say on the question of personhood. A fetus is certainly a potential person. But it is also, scientifically speaking, a collection of cells - a part of a woman's body. A woman may think of her fetus as a person or as just cells depending on whether the pregnancy is wanted or not. This does not reflect moral confusion, but choice in action.

The recent belief that the fetus can be considered as separate from a woman's body, health and life may become the basis for a compromise in which abortion will be ringed with restrictions designed to make a woman ''think twice.'' Waiting periods might be imposed. Lectures - on anything from fetal development to the chances of winning child support from a boyfriend - might be required.

The intent will be to acknowledge our national ambivalence, but the effect will be to punish women. For example, medical ethicist Daniel Callahan believes the choice of abortion should be accompanied by ''genuine moral agony and anguish and difficulty'' on the woman's part.

The nearly half-million people who demonstrated in Washington on April 9th represented a range of views on abortion, from those who see it as part of a spectrum of birth control options to those who see it as a last resort. But they were all there to remind us that when we talk abortion, we are talking about women, and when we talk about women, we are talking about thinking, morally conscious, human beings.

The question America needs to return to is: When will women achieve their full personhood? We already know the answer to this one: Not until abortion - and contraception - are freely available to all women, without insulting restrictions and caveats. Anything less is a violation of something that goes far deeper, and cuts closer to the very meaning of ''personhood,'' than mere privacy.