FACT CHECK: 50 million abortions claim checks out
CLOSE

Buy Photo Register Reality Fact Check. (Photo: The Des Moines Register)Buy Photo

Iowa state Rep. Greg Heartsill made headlines last week for reading Dr. Seuss' "Horton Hears a Who!" during an impassioned speech from the House floor in support of a so-called "Personhood Amendment" to the state constitution.

Before his dramatic reading and political interpretation of the children's book, Heartsill, R-Chariton, offered one clear, verifiable fact. He said 50 million abortions have been performed in the United States since 1973, when the U.S. Supreme Court's Roe v. Wade decision made the procedure legal.

We rate this statement TRUE.

Data from the Guttmacher Institute — a research organization that supports legal access to abortion — does indeed show more than 50 million abortions were performed between 1973 and 2011. Those findings are peer-reviewed and have been cited by proponents and opponents of legal access to abortion alike.

Figures compiled by the federal government over the same period show less than 50 million, but are missing data from several states over several years.

CONTEXT

Here's exactly what Heartsill said in his Feb. 26 point of personal privilege on the House floor:

"This morning I along with 10 other colleagues have introduced House Joint Resolution 9. It is a resolution that proposes an amendment to the Iowa Constitution which would recognize and protect the inalienable right to life of every person in our great state regardless of where they are in their state of development.

"It is a right that has been denied to well over 50 million Americans — citizens — since 1973."

When asked to clarify what he meant by 50 million Americans whose "right to life" has been "denied," Heartsill said he was referencing the number of abortion procedures performed since the Roe v. Wade ruling. That's what we're fact-checking here.

That big-picture number — more than 50 million abortions performed since 1973 — is a frequent talking point for opponents of abortion. But unlike other rhetorical points in the political battle over abortion, it's not contested by advocates of legal access, and in fact is based on data produced by an organization that supports abortion.

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-877-424-0225. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

ANALYSIS

The Guttmacher Institute estimates that 52.6 million abortions were performed between 1973 and 2011, the most recent year for which data is available. That number was certainly higher as of Feb. 26, 2015, when Heartsill made his remarks.

The figure is based on data collected over several years and recorded in two scholarly papers: "Abortion Incidence and Access to Services in the United States, 2008," published in 2011, and "Abortion Incidence and Service Availability in the United States, 2011," published in 2014. Both appeared in Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health, a peer-reviewed journal published by the Guttmacher Institute.

The data was drawn from surveys of health care facilities starting in 1973 "known or expected to have provided abortion services," although for 13 years researchers relied on estimates formed by interpolating "numbers of abortions and adjustments based on state health department reports."

The federal Centers for Disease Control collects similar data and publishes an annual "Abortion Surveillance" report. Data from the 2002 edition and the most recent 2014 edition show 42 million abortions performed between 1973 and 2011, but comes with a California-sized caveat.

Several states have gone years without providing data for the CDC report, including California — the most populous in the nation — which hasn't reported abortion figures since 1998.

A spokesman for the California Department of Public Health told the Register this week the state has no data on the total number of abortions performed annually. With 38.8 million people, according to 2014 census data, California represents 12 percent of the U.S. population.

New Hampshire hasn't reported data since 1998 either, while Maryland, Oklahoma, Alaska, West Virginia, Louisiana and Delaware also have failed to report in at least one year since then.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1bdFUML