Definition of Fetus by Merriam-Webster
Recent Examples on the Web

The suit challenges laws to ban most abortions once a fetal heartbeat is detected, and to ban the procedure for women seeking to end pregnancies due to the gender, race or disability of the fetus. Bruce Schreiner, The Seattle Times, "Judge cautions lawyers to watch language in abortion case," 25 Mar. 2019

At the same time, researchers are gaining new insights into genetic and environmental influences on the fetus, such as a mother’s obesity or exposure to toxic substances. Laura Landro, WSJ, "The New, Improved World of Infant Care," 16 Sep. 2018

Certainly, a surgical delivery can be lifesaving when, for example, the fetus or the mother is at risk of a serious or fatal complication from a vaginal delivery. Jane E. Brody, New York Times, "The Importance of Infants’ Exposure to Micro-Organisms," 5 Feb. 2018

To allow the implantation and development of a fetus that could be construed as a foreign invader, the immune system needs to selectively ease its normal level of vigilance. Melissa Healy, The Seattle Times, "Pregnancy and childbirth may protect some women from developing dementia," 23 July 2018

Without a placenta, which attaches the embryo to the uterine wall, an embryo cannot develop into a fetus. Susan Scutti, CNN, "Embryo-like structure synthesized in a lab could help decipher infertility," 3 May 2018

Iron helps sustain a fetus’s growth and development, according to the Mayo Clinic. Cassie Shortsleeve, SELF, "Do I Really Need to Take Prenatal Vitamins Before I’m Even Pregnant?," 19 Apr. 2018

The chemicals are among a group of pollutants that are seen as emerging health concerns and have been linked to illnesses ranging from some cancers to developmental problems in fetuses. Lee Bergquist, Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, "Firefighting foam used by unit of Johnson Controls poses toxic threat to Green Bay," 19 Mar. 2018

Officials have said that the chemicals are particularly worrisome for fetuses, babies and breast-feeing mothers. Bob Shaw, Twin Cities, "Water-drinking public worried — or not — about 3M pollution in Washington County," 6 June 2017

These example sentences are selected automatically from various online news sources to reflect current usage of the word 'fetus.' Views expressed in the examples do not represent the opinion of Merriam-Webster or its editors. Send us feedback.