Women Fault Soviet System For Abortion
Some Soviet health researchers believe the real number of abortions may be far higher - as much as double the official figure. Many women readily pay $75 to $150 for an illegal abortion, often performed after hours in a state hospital or outpatient clinic.

A paid abortion has two advantages over the state's free operations: a woman is given enough anesthetic, and she avoids the required hospital stay, typically three days long.

''Our medicine is very cruel - it has a stone heart and Stone Age equipment,'' said a Moscow woman who recalled her own abortion, performed by rude medical workers with an ineffective dose of painkiller. 'Cruelest Abortion System'

As debate about social problems has burst onto the pages of popular periodicals here, a few women have dared to publish their outraged criticisms.

The Soviet Union has ''the world's cruelest abortion system,'' charged a commentator in New Times magazine. ''The main thing is to queue up in time and not shudder when you climb onto the obstetrical execution block.''

The most graphic account appeared last month in the weekly Moscow News, under the headline ''I Don't Want to Be Sorry I'm a Woman.''

The author, Yekaterina Nikolayeva, condemned the ''conveyor line'' atmosphere at the clinic where she had an abortion. When she entered the operating room, a doctor yelled at her for staring at his blood-stained rubber gloves.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

''Hurry up, you,'' he said. ''I'm sick and tired of your stupidity.''

The author quoted another doctor scolding a frightened patient: ''You should have had second thoughts before. You're all fond of sweets, but you're not willing to pay the price.'' Abortion Rate 'Not Normal'

The Moscow News account dismayed Aleksandra P. Biryukova, the highest ranking woman in the Soviet Government, who ordered a Health Ministry investigation and called the high Soviet abortion rate ''not normal.''

''We must change this radically over the next year and a half to two years, by developing the contraceptive industry,'' she said at a recent news conference in Moscow.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You will receive emails containing news content , updates and promotions from The New York Times. You may opt-out at any time. You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Mrs. Biryukova's call for change will not be easily accomplished, though. Despite their bitter complaints, many Soviet women still see abortion, which has been legal here since 1955, as their simplest birth control option.

''My mother had 3 children and 13 abortions,'' a young Moscow woman said. ''My father refused to use condoms, and there was nothing else she could do.''

Abortion is available to all women in the first trimester of pregnancy. In the second trimester, abortions can be performed for medical reasons, or for ''social reasons,'' like rape or divorce.

The Moscow News reported in January that 600 to 700 women die each year as a result of abortions in the Russian Republic alone, which has slightly more than half the national population. Soviet officials also say the high abortion rate has contributed to high rates of infertility and premature births. Promise of More Contraceptives

The Health Ministry has promised to increase production of intrauterine devices and condoms, and to import more birth control pills, which are not manufactured in the Soviet Union.

But family planning programs are almost nonexistent, and there is little basic educational material that could overcome widespread beliefs that contraceptives are unreliable, dangerous or too difficult to obtain.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

''The diaphragm? I know that they exist, but I don't know anything about them, and few women use them,'' said the nurse, Mrs. Lobikinova, in a recent interview at Women's Clinic Number 9 in Moscow.

Yakov G. Zhukovsky, the chief doctor at the clinic, said that many Soviet women flatly reject birth control pills.

''The first pills sold here had high doses of hormones that caused many side effects,'' he said. ''Those pills have been taken out of production. But the attitude toward today's pills remains the same.''

Dr. Zhukovsky said Soviet women have abortions not so much because there are not alternatives, but because they know so little about their options.

Women rely on friends rather than their doctors for birth control advice, said Irina A. Zhuravskaya, an editor at Rabotnitsa, a magazine directed at women. ''Women usually see a doctor only after they get pregnant,'' she said.

The Government offers financial incentives designed to encourage women to have more children. These originally were intended to increase low birth rates among Russian and Slavic women, and there is some statistical evidence that the incentives are beginning to work. But there has been no organized effort to discourage abortion, and rates remain high in the Russian Republic.

Still, there is no national debate here about the morality of abortion.

''We are basically an atheist society,'' said Svetlana I. Markovich, an obstetrician-gynecologist at the Family and Marriage Clinic in Moscow. ''Of course it would be better to prevent pregnancy rather than to have an abortion. But I can't think of abortion as murder, because at the stage when abortions are permitted, this is not a person.''