Possible Physical Side Effects After Abortion
The physical side effects after an abortion can vary from woman to woman and there are potential side effects and risks that you should be aware of.

It is important to talk to a health professional as well as the doctor who will perform your abortion about possible side effects.

Your period should return about 4-6 weeks after the abortion, and you can get pregnant again soon after the abortion.

If your doctor has prescribed antibiotics, it is important to take them as directed in order to help prevent infection.

For information about abortion, you may call the APA toll-free helpline at 1-800-672-2296, or search locally by zip code below.

Find a Abortion Alternative in your area

Anticipated physical side effects following an abortion

The following is a list of side effects that are frequently experienced after an abortion. It is possible to experience these side effects for as long as 2 to 4 weeks following the procedure.

Potential and more serious complications following an abortion

Although serious complications occur in fewer than 1 out of 100 first trimester abortions and approximately 1 out of every 50 late term abortions, it is important to be aware of the following risks:

Heavy or persistent bleeding

Infection or sepsis

Damage to the cervix

Scarring of the uterine lining

Perforation of the uterus

Damage to other organs

Death

It is important to understand that these risks are rare and that some of these risks are associated with child birth. What matters is that you are aware that these risks exist as you strive to make an informed decision about your pregnancy.

Severe abortion physical side effects

If you have had an abortion, call your doctor and seek medical attention if your side effects become severe or if you experience any of the following:

Severe abdominal and back pain that prohibits you from standing up

Bleeding that is heavier than a normal menstrual period

Foul-smelling discharge

Fever above 100.4 F

Continuing symptoms of pregnancy

Find a Abortion Alternative in your area

Compiled using information from the following sources:

1. MedlinePlus [Internet]. Bethesda (MD): National Library of Medicine (US); [updated 2006 Feb 24]. Abortion; [updated 2006 Feb 21; reviewed 2006 Feb 21; cited 2006 Feb 24].

https://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/abortion.html

2.Current Obstetric & Gynecologic Diagnosis & Treatment-Ninth Ed. DeCherney, Alan H., et al, Ch. 33.