Second Trimester Abortion
Preparation For the Procedure

When you arrive for your appointment you will be asked to complete personal demographic and health information and consent forms. An ultrasound will be performed to determine the length of gestation, if one has not been recently done at another FPA facility. You will meet with an admissions staff member to discuss the procedure, your medical history as well as pre-operative and post-operative instructions. The admissions staff member will assist you with any additional paperwork. The laboratory technician will draw a sample of blood to determine your iron level and Rh factor. After you have changed into a gown provided by the clinic your vital signs will be taken.

You will be escorted to the treatment room where the clinician, a Physician Assistant or Nurse Practitioner, will perform a history and physical and will insert the cervical dilators. This procedure takes approximately 5-15 minutes. Most patients experience cramping, pressure and discomfort during the insertion. We will provide you with pain medication. After the insertion, the vaginal canal will be packed with sterile gauze to keep cervical dilators in place and to prevent infection.

After your insertion, you will be escorted from the treatment room to the discharge area. The discharge medical staff will give you post-insertion instructions, medications, and an appointment time for your second insertion or surgery.

If a second day of preparation for the surgery is needed, you will return the following day and the clinician will remove the first set of dilators then insert a second set for additional dilation. Again, this procedure will take approximately 5-15 minutes and you will likely experience cramping and discomfort similar to the previous day. You can take the pain medication provided by our facility, with breakfast, before coming in for your visit to decrease your discomfort.

The Day of Procedure

Before You Arrive

Do not eat or drink anything for eight full hours before your procedure , most often after midnight. Please do not have anything by mouth including medications, water, gum, candy, food or drink of any kind.

, most often after midnight. Please do not have anything by mouth including medications, water, gum, candy, food or drink of any kind. If you have anything the morning of your visit your surgery will be delayed for your safety.

If You Take Medications

In some rare instances you may be instructed by our medical staff to take your regular medications with a very small sip of water.

If you take insulin for diabetes, DO NOT take insulin the morning of your surgery. Please bring your insulin with you along with a small snack.

If you have an inhaler for asthma, please bring it with you, even if you rarely use it.

Please bring any medications you are currently taking.

Preparing for Your Procedure

Plan to spend 4 to 6 hours under our care at the office. Make sure that you have prearranged for a ride to and from the office.

Do not wear any jewelry, including earrings, bracelets, rings, etc. All facial piercing jewelry must be removed, you may not have any piercings in the nose or mouth.

Do not bring any valuables or a large amount of cash.

Please do not bring children to the office.

D&E Procedure

When you arrive at the office, you will change into a gown that we provide and have your vital signs taken. A medical assistant will escort you to the procedure suite and start your IV.

In the procedure suite, a licensed CRNA will administer sedation and a licensed medical doctor who is board certified in OB/GYN will perform the abortion by removing the pregnancy and aspirating the uterus. The procedure generally lasts 10-20 minutes. Patients are sedated for this procedure, which means that they will not feel any pain or discomfort.

Recovery

After the procedure, you will be taken to the recovery room where trained medical personnel, including nurses and medical assistants will care for you until you are ready to be discharged. Recovery time is approximately 1 to 3 hours for most patients, depending on the type of procedure performed as well as other factors.

Discharge

After you leave the recovery room, our medical staff will offer you a light snack. Before you are discharged to your driver, you will receive post-operative care instructions and medications to take home.

You will also be given an instruction sheet with our 24-hour emergency number. Please call with any questions or to discuss concerns that might arise after your visit.

After your Visit

You should rest for the remainder of the day after your procedure. You are able to go to work or school next day, unless the doctor has told you otherwise.