Heavy Metals Toxicity and the Environment
Arsenic is a ubiquitous element that is detected at low concentrations in virtually all environmental matrices [ 33 ]. The major inorganic forms of arsenic include the trivalent arsenite and the pentavalent arsenate. The organic forms are the methylated metabolites – monomethylarsonic acid (MMA), dimethylarsinic acid (DMA) and trimethylarsine oxide. Environmental pollution by arsenic occurs as a result of natural phenomena such as volcanic eruptions and soil erosion, and anthropogenic activities [ 33 ]. Several arsenic-containing compounds are produced industrially, and have been used to manufacture products with agricultural applications such as insecticides, herbicides, fungicides, algicides, sheep dips, wood preservatives, and dye-stuffs. They have also been used in veterinary medicine for the eradication of tapeworms in sheep and cattle [ 34 ]. Arsenic compounds have also been used in the medical field for at least a century in the treatment of syphilis, yaws, amoebic dysentery, and trypanosomaiasis [ 34 , 35 ]. Arsenic-based drugs are still used in treating certain tropical diseases such as African sleeping sickness and amoebic dysentery, and in veterinary medicine to treat parasitic diseases, including filariasis in dogs and black head in turkeys and chickens [ 35 ]. Recently, arsenic trioxide has been approved by the Food and Drug Administration as an anticancer agent in the treatment of acute promeylocytic leukemia [ 36 ]. Its therapeutic action has been attributed to the induction of programmed cell death (apoptosis) in leukemia cells [ 24 ].

Contamination with high levels of arsenic is of concern because arsenic can cause a number of human health effects. Several epidemiological studies have reported a strong association between arsenic exposure and increased risks of both carcinogenic and systemic health effects [ 41 ]. Interest in the toxicity of arsenic has been heightened by recent reports of large populations in West Bengal, Bangladesh, Thailand, Inner Mongolia, Taiwan, China, Mexico, Argentina, Chile, Finland and Hungary that have been exposed to high concentrations of arsenic in their drinking water and are displaying various clinico-pathological conditions including cardiovascular and peripheral vascular disease, developmental anomalies, neurologic and neurobehavioural disorders, diabetes, hearing loss, portal fibrosis, hematologic disorders (anemia, leukopenia and eosinophilia) and carcinoma [ 25 , 33 , 35 , 39 ]. Arsenic exposure affects virtually all organ systems including the cardiovascular, dermatologic, nervous, hepatobilliary, renal, gastro-intestinal, and respiratory systems [ 41 ]. Research has also pointed to significantly higher standardized mortality rates for cancers of the bladder, kidney, skin, and liver in many areas of arsenic pollution. The severity of adverse health effects is related to the chemical form of arsenic, and is also time- and dose-dependent [ 42 , 43 ]. Although the evidence of carcinogenicity of arsenic in humans seems strong, the mechanism by which it produces tumors in humans is not completely understood [ 44 ].

Diet, for most individuals, is the largest source of exposure, with an average intake of about 50 µg per day. Intake from air, water and soil are usually much smaller, but exposure from these media may become significant in areas of arsenic contamination. Workers who produce or use arsenic compounds in such occupations as vineyards, ceramics, glass-making, smelting, refining of metallic ores, pesticide manufacturing and application, wood preservation, semiconductor manufacturing can be exposed to substantially higher levels of arsenic [ 39 ]. Arsenic has also been identified at 781 sites of the 1,300 hazardous waste sites that have been proposed by the U.S. EPA for inclusion on the national priority list [ 33 , 39 ]. Human exposure at these sites may occur by a variety of pathways, including inhalation of dusts in air, ingestion of contaminated water or soil, or through the food chain [ 40 ].

It is estimated that several million people are exposed to arsenic chronically throughout the world, especially in countries like Bangladesh, India, Chile, Uruguay, Mexico, Taiwan, where the ground water is contaminated with high concentrations of arsenic. Exposure to arsenic occurs via the oral route (ingestion), inhalation, dermal contact, and the parenteral route to some extent [ 33 , 34 , 37 ]. Arsenic concentrations in air range from 1 to 3 ng/m 3 in remote locations (away from human releases), and from 20 to 100 ng/m 3 in cities. Its water concentration is usually less than 10µg/L, although higher levels can occur near natural mineral deposits or mining sites. Its concentration in various foods ranges from 20 to 140 ng/kg [ 38 ]. Natural levels of arsenic in soil usually range from 1 to 40 mg/kg, but pesticide application or waste disposal can produce much higher values [ 25 ].

Mechanisms of Toxicity and Carcinogenicity

Analyzing the toxic effects of arsenic is complicated because the toxicity is highly influenced by its oxidation state and solubility, as well as many other intrinsic and extrinsic factors [45]. Several studies have indicated that the toxicity of arsenic depends on the exposure dose, frequency and duration, the biological species, age, and gender, as well as on individual susceptibilities, genetic and nutritional factors [46]. Most cases of human toxicity from arsenic have been associated with exposure to inorganic arsenic. Inorganic trivalent arsenite (AsIII) is 2–10 times more toxic than pentavalent arsenate (AsV) [5]. By binding to thiol or sulfhydryl groups on proteins, As (III) can inactivate over 200 enzymes. This is the likely mechanism responsible for arsenic’s widespread effects on different organ systems. As (V) can replace phosphate, which is involved in many biochemical pathways [5, 47].

One of the mechanisms by which arsenic exerts its toxic effect is through impairment of cellular respiration by the inhibition of various mitochondrial enzymes, and the uncoupling of oxidative phosphorylation. Most toxicity of arsenic results from its ability to interact with sulfhydryl groups of proteins and enzymes, and to substitute phosphorous in a variety of biochemical reactions [48]. Arsenic in vitro reacts with protein sulfhydryl groups to inactivate enzymes, such as dihydrolipoyl dehydrogenase and thiolase, thereby producing inhibited oxidation of pyruvate and betaoxidation of fatty acids [49]. The major metabolic pathway for inorganic arsenic in humans is methylation. Arsenic trioxide is methylated to two major metabolites via a non-enzymatic process to monomethylarsonic acid (MMA), which is further methylated enzymatically to dimethyl arsenic acid (DMA) before excretion in the urine [40, 47]. It was previously thought that this methylation process is a pathway of arsenic detoxification, however, recent studies have pointed out that some methylated metabolites may be more toxic than arsenite if they contain trivalent forms of arsenic [41].

Tests for genotoxicity have indicated that arsenic compounds inhibit DNA repair, and induce chromosomal aberrations, sister-chromatid exchanges, and micronuclei formation in both human and rodent cells in culture [50–52] and in cells of exposed humans [53]. Reversion assays with Salmonella typhimurium fail to detect mutations that are induced by arsenic compounds. Although arsenic compounds are generally perceived as weak mutagens in bacterial and animal cells, they exhibit clastogenic properties in many cell types in vivo and in vitro [54]. In the absence of animal models, in vitro cell transformation studies become a useful means of obtaining information on the carcinogenic mechanisms of arsenic toxicity. Arsenic and arsenical compounds are cytotoxic and induce morphological transformations of Syrian hamster embryo (SHE) cells as well as mouse C3H10T1/2 cells and BALB/3T3 cells [55, 56].

Based on the comet assay, it has been reported that arsenic trioxide induces DNA damage in human lymphophytes [57] and also in mice leukocytes [58]. Arsenic compounds have also been shown to induce gene amplification, arrest cells in mitosis, inhibit DNA repair, and induce expression of the c-fos gene and the oxidative stress protein heme oxygenase in mammalian cells [58, 59]. They have been implicated as promoters and comutagens for a variety of toxic agents [60]. Recent studies in our laboratory have demonstrated that arsenic trioxide is cytotoxic and able to transcriptionally induce a significant number of stress genes and related proteins in human liver carcinoma cells [61].

Epidemiological investigations have indicated that long-term arsenic exposure results in promotion of carcinogenesis. Several hypotheses have been proposed to describe the mechanism of arsenic-induced carcinogenesis. Zhao et al. [62] reported that arsenic may act as a carcinogen by inducing DNA hypomethylation, which in turn facilitates aberrant gene expression. Additionally, it was found that arsenic is a potent stimulator of extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase Erk1 and AP-1 transactivational activity, and an efficient inducer of c-fos and c-jun gene expression [63]. Induction of c-jun and c-fos by arsenic is associated with activation of JNK [64]. However, the role of JNK activation by arsenite in cell transformation or tumor promotion is unclear.

In another study, Trouba et al. [65] concluded that long-term exposure to high levels of arsenic might make cells more susceptible to mitogenic stimulation and that alterations in mitogenic signaling proteins might contribute to the carcinogenic action of arsenic. Collectively, several recent studies have demonstrated that arsenic can interfere with cell signaling pathways (e.g., the p53 signaling pathway) that are frequently implicated in the promotion and progression of a variety of tumor types in experimental animal models, and of some human tumors [66, 68]. However, the specific alterations in signal transduction pathways or the actual targets that contribute to the development of arsenic-induced tumors in humans following chronic consumption of arsenic remains uncertain.

Recent clinical trials have found that arsenic trioxide has therapeutic value in the treatment of acute promyelocytic leukemia, and there is interest in exploring its effectiveness in the treatment of a variety of other cancers [69,70]. In acute promyelocytic leukemia, the specific molecular event critical to the formation of malignant cells is known. A study by Puccetti et al. [71] found that forced overexpression of BCR-ABL susceptibility in human lymphoblasts cells resulted in greatly enhanced sensitivity to arsenic-induced apoptosis. They also concluded that arsenic trioxide is a tumor specific agent capable of inducing apoptosis selectively in acute promyelocytic leukemia cells. Several recent studies have shown that arsenic can induce apoptosis through alterations in other cell signaling pathways [72,73]. In addition to acute peomyelocytic leukemia, arsenic is thought to have therapeutic potential for myeloma [74]. In summary, numerous cancer chemotherapy studies in cell cultures and in patients with acute promyelocytic leukemia demonstrate that arsenic trioxide administration can lead to cell-cycle arrest and apoptosis in malignant cells.

Previous studies have also examined p53 gene expression and mutation in tumors obtained from subjects with a history of arsenic ingestion. p53 participates in many cellular functions, cell-cycle control, DNA repair, differentiation, genomic plasticity and programmed cell death. Additional support for the hypothesis that arsenic can modulate gene expression has been provided by several different studies [75,76]. Collectively, these studies provide further evidence that various forms of arsenic can alter gene expression and that such changes could contribute substantially to the toxic and carcinogenic actions of arsenic treatment in human populations [77].

Several in vitro studies in our laboratory have demonstrated that arsenic modulates DNA synthesis, gene and protein expression, genotoxicity, mitosis and/or apoptotic mechanisms in various cell lines including keratinocytes, melanocytes, dendritic cells, dermal fibroblasts, microvascular endothelial cells, monocytes, and T-cells [78], colon cancer cells [79], lung cancer cells [80], human leukemia cells [81], Jurkat-T lymphocytes [82], and human liver carcinoma cells [83]. We have also shown that oxidative stress plays a key role in arsenic induced cytotoxicity, a process that is modulated by pro- and/or anti-oxidants such as ascorbic acid and n-acetyl cysteine [84–86]. We have further demonstrated that the toxicity of arsenic depends on its chemical form, the inorganic form being more toxic than the organic one [42].

Various hypotheses have been proposed to explain the carcinogenicity of inorganic arsenic. Nevertheless, the molecular mechanisms by which this arsenical induces cancer are still poorly understood. Results of previous studies have indicated that inorganic arsenic does not act through classic genotoxic and mutagenic mechanisms, but rather may be a tumor promoter that modifies signal transduction pathways involved in cell growth and proliferation [68]. Although much progress has been recently made in the area of arsenic’s possible mode(s) of carcinogenic action, a scientific consensus has not yet reached. A recent review discusses nine different possible modes of action of arsenic carcinogenesis: induced chromosomal abnormalities, oxidative stress, altered DNA repair, altered DNA methylation patterns, altered growth factors, enhanced cell proliferation, promotion/progression, suppression of p53, and gene amplification [87]. Presently, three modes (chromosomal abnormality, oxidative stress, and altered growth factors) of arsenic carcinogenesis have shown a degree of positive evidence, both in experimental systems (animal and human cells) and in human tissues. The remaining possible modes of carcinogenic action (progression of carcinogenesis, altered DNA repair, p53 suppression, altered DNA methylation patterns and gene amplification) do not have as much evidence, particularly from in vivo studies with laboratory animals, in vitro studies with cultured human cells, or human data from case or population studies. Thus, the mode-of-action studies suggest that arsenic might be acting as a cocarcinogen, a promoter, or a progressor of carcinogenesis.