The Relationship between Land–Ocean Surface Temperature Contrast and Radiative Forcing: Journal of Climate: Vol 24, No 13
Previous work has demonstrated that observed and modeled climates show a near-time-invariant ratio of mean land to mean ocean surface temperature change under transient and equilibrium global warming. This study confirms this in a range of atmospheric models coupled to perturbed sea surface temperatures (SSTs), slab (thermodynamics only) oceans, and a fully coupled ocean. Away from equilibrium, it is found that the atmospheric processes that maintain the ratio cause a land-to-ocean heat transport anomaly that can be approximated using a two-box energy balance model. When climate is forced by increasing atmospheric CO 2 concentration, the heat transport anomaly moves heat from land to ocean, constraining the land to warm in step with the ocean surface, despite the small heat capacity of the land. The heat transport anomaly is strongly related to the top-of-atmosphere radiative flux imbalance, and hence it tends to a small value as equilibrium is approached. In contrast, when climate is forced by prescribing changes in SSTs, the heat transport anomaly replaces “missing” radiative forcing over land by moving heat from ocean to land, warming the land surface. The heat transport anomaly remains substantial in steady state. These results are consistent with earlier studies that found that both land and ocean surface temperature changes may be approximated as local responses to global mean radiative forcing. The modeled heat transport anomaly has large impacts on surface heat fluxes but small impacts on precipitation, circulation, and cloud radiative forcing compared with the impacts of surface temperature change. No substantial nonlinearities are found in these atmospheric variables when the effects of forcing and surface temperature change are added.

3. GCM data Section: Choose Top of page Abstract 1.Introduction 2.Mechanisms proposed to ... 3.GCM data << 4.Results 5.Discussion 6.Summary REFERENCES CITING ARTICLES To test the hypotheses, we take data from a variety of “slab,” perturbed SST, and two fully coupled GCM experiments. Slab models couple the atmosphere to a shallow (typically 50 m deep) thermodynamic mixed layer ocean. Computational cost is much reduced compared with experiments where the atmosphere is coupled to a full dynamical ocean, as the GCM obtains a new equilibrium after perturbation in a few decades. Heat “flux corrections” are applied at the ocean surface to partially compensate for missing ocean heat transports that exist in the real ocean. Sea ice is interactive, as with a full GCM. (However, in the perturbed experiments, ocean temperatures under the sea ice are not perturbed and hence sea ice coverage changes little). The prescribed SST experiments omit the numerical ocean simulation. Instead, SSTs are maintained at “control” present-day levels or present-day levels plus a globally uniform perturbation. The ocean surface is able to absorb or emit any amount of heat without suffering a change in temperature, meaning that the long-term mean of ocean heat uptake ΔU O is not necessarily zero in steady state. The fully coupled experiments couple the atmosphere to a full ocean model that simulates dynamics and heat transports. We take slab data from the Quantifying Uncertainty in Model Predictions (QUMP) project (Murphy et al. 2004; Webb et al. 2006) for 188 models based on the Hadley Centre Slab Model, version 3 (HadSM3) (Pope et al. 2000; Williams et al. 2001a,b), but physically perturbed in their subgrid-scale parameterization to explore aspects of modeling uncertainty. We also take data from the Cloud Feedback Model Intercomparison Project (CFMIP) (see acknowledgments) for the Canadian Centre for Climate Modelling and Analysis Coupled General Circulation Model, version 3.1 (CCCma CGCM 3.1); ECHAM5; Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory (GFDL); Hadley Centre Global Slab Model, version 1 (HadGSM1); Hadley Centre Slab Model, version 4 (HadSM4); Model for Interdisciplinary Research on Climate 3.2, low-resolution version (MIROC-lores, hereafter MIROC); and University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign (UIUC) slab models. Finally, we have an ensemble of National Center for Atmospheric Research Community Atmosphere Model, version 3 (NCAR CAM3), slab runs prepared at NCAR (Collins et al. 2006 and see acknowledgments). Equilibrium unperturbed control experiments and experiments in which the concentration of atmospheric CO 2 is doubled (2 × CO 2 ) are available in each case. “Spinup” data, in which the model makes the transition from the control state to its new equilibrium after perturbation, are available for the QUMP models, CCCma, GFDL, and CAM3. We have four spinups for CAM3, and one for each of the other models. The spinups allow for the separation of rapid land surface and atmospheric adjustments from feedbacks that scale approximately the with global mean surface temperature change (Gregory et al. 2004). In the QUMP, HadSM3, HadSM4, and HadGSM1 models, control SSTs are relaxed toward a 1951–80 climatology from the Global Sea Ice and Sea Surface Temperature dataset (GISST) (Rayner et al. 1996). The SSTs in CAM3 and CFMIP are similar, although those in CCSM3 appear to correspond to preindustrial conditions (control SST periods were neither specified nor reported back for CFMIP). We take prescribed SST experiments from six QUMP models, the Hadley Centre Atmospheric Model, version 3 (HadAM3, the atmospheric component of HadSM3), the Hadley Centre Global Atmospheric Model, version 2 (HadGAM2) (Martin et al. 2006), and CAM3. Unperturbed control experiments are available for each model. Globally uniform SST perturbation experiments are available for HadAM3 (+3 K) and HadGAM2 (+4 K). In HadAM3, sea ice is interactive and relaxed back to control conditions as with the slab experiments; in HadGAM2, sea ice is prescribed at control conditions throughout. Hansen experiments (Hansen et al. 2002), in which SSTs and sea ice are held at control values but the atmospheric CO 2 concentration is doubled, are available for QUMP, HadAM3, and CAM3. The Hansen experiments show only the global mean surface temperature’s independent rapid adjustments. We have one more HadAM3 experiment that includes a uniform +3 K SST perturbation and a doubling of CO 2 concentration, allowing us to investigate whether the separate perturbations add linearly. The +3 K SST perturbation is very close to that which would result from the 2 × CO 2 forcing, so that this experiment is near equilibrium. (In an experiment in which the ocean is free to respond to forcing, such as the slab experiments described above, the SST response to forcing is not spatially uniform.) Control SSTs in HadAM3 and HadGAM2 are specified from GISST; those in CAM3 are quite similar. We take fully coupled data from the third climate configuration of the Met Office Unified Model (HadCM3) (Gordon et al. 2000). One equilibrium unperturbed control experiment and one 2 × CO 2 experiment are available. The perturbed experiment starts from the control state and is run for 20 yr. Information for all the GCMs is summarized in Table 1. Table 1. Number of perturbed ensemble members, number of years for each ensemble member, and values of ϕ trans and ϕ eqm in the slab, fully coupled, and perturbed SST experiments. Values of ϕ trans are not listed for slab models with no spinup data. Errors are 5%–95% confidence intervals. Image of typeset table

5. Discussion Section: Choose Top of page Abstract 1.Introduction 2.Mechanisms proposed to ... 3.GCM data 4.Results 5.Discussion << 6.Summary REFERENCES CITING ARTICLES In our model simulations, ΔA is approximately what we expect from Eq. (4). Hence, the modeled climates behave as if atmospheric processes described by JGW08, CS09, and Dong et al. (2009) strongly couple both the land and ocean surfaces to the combined land and ocean heat reservoir. Equation (4) does tend to overestimate ΔA slightly near ΔT G = 0 in the slab and Hansen experiments. This is consistent with the facts that ΔT L increases slightly more than needed to maintain equilibrium ϕ during the initial phase following the application of forcing in the slab experiments and that ΔT L is nonzero in the Hansen experiments (Fig. 2; see JGW08). Equivalently, the heat transported by ΔA is not quite sufficient to maintain constant ϕ. Nevertheless, behavior is qualitatively as described by the heat transport hypothesis of LC07. We do not find evidence for our alternative nonenergetic teleconnection hypothesis, whereby teleconnections influence the local surface energy budget without significant advection of energy between land and ocean surfaces. Although both hypotheses take the near-time-invariant ratio of ϕ as axiomatic, distinguishing between the two is important. Under the heat transport hypothesis, radiative forcing over land and ocean are equally influential; under the nonenergetic teleconnection hypothesis, radiative forcing over land has little effect. Hence, we find with Forster et al. (2000) and Boer and Yu (2003) that modeled surface temperature changes are quite well described as local responses to global mean forcings. In common with CS09 and D09, we find that ocean and land climate change are inseparable and that adherence to ϕ tends to override any other consideration in a variety of different model runs. We do not find evidence that radiative forcing over land has little effect, however. This is potentially important for understanding past and future climate change when we consider that the majority of anthropogenic aerosol forcing occurs over land (Forster et al. 2007). Surface temperature, precipitation, cloud radiative forcing, and atmospheric circulation change look similar in slab experiments, perturbed SST experiments, and perturbed SST experiments whose TOA flux anomaly has been balanced by the application of radiative forcing; energy fluxes at the surface are very different. Immediately after a doubling of CO 2 concentration, slab experiments show a land-to-ocean energy transport anomaly that prevents ΔT L from increasing rapidly and maintains near-time-invariant ϕ (Fig. 1b). As global mean temperature increases and climate approaches its new equilibrium, ΔA decreases until it reaches a small value of either sign, dependent on the GCM considered (Fig. 1c). Conversely, where we impose ΔT O in a perturbed SST experiment, energy flows in the opposite direction—from ocean to land—causing land warming and establishing time-invariant ϕ. Large ΔA continues to flow after temperatures have stabilized (Fig. 1d). In our HasdAM3 +3K SST experiment, where global mean temperature change is similar to that found at the perturbed equilibrium in the 2 × CO 2 slab runs, net radiation to space is around 4.5 W m−2 globally. Approximately 6.5 W m−2 is lost by the ocean surface, which we expect from ΔU O ~ ΔN G /(1 − f) [see section 2b(2)]. We can bring the model almost to equilibrium by doubling CO 2 globally, reducing TOA heat loss to space to about 0.5 W m−2, as we do in the +3K SST + (2 × CO 2 ) HadAM3 experiment. If we had instead doubled CO 2 over the ocean alone, then this would lead to a global mean forcing of about 2.5–3 W m−2, insufficient to correct TOA imbalance. The forcing above the ocean itself would be about 3.5–4 W m−2, insufficient to balance ocean surface heat loss. These results suggest that radiative forcing over land is important. However, a more persuasive test might be to compare the modeled responses where forcing is applied globally, only over ocean, and only over land. Forster et al. (2000) carried out such experiments using an intermediate complexity GCM and found very little difference in global climate sensitivity for either CO 2 or solar forcing (their Tables 1 and 2), meaning that surface temperature responses were primarily dependent on the magnitude of global mean forcing and not forcing location. Hence, they found that doubling CO 2 over ocean alone produced a global mean surface temperature response of about a factor of 1 − f the size found when CO 2 was doubled globally. Still, the perturbed land temperature experiments of D09 are apparently inconsistent with our GCM runs and those of Forster et al. (2000). Where land temperatures were increased by 1 K, SSTs only increased by 0.2 K. This suggests that SSTs are little affected by land temperature change. Conversely, where land temperatures were fixed at control values and atmospheric CO 2 concentration was doubled (a fixed land Hansen experiment), the SST response was only 1 K, as opposed to 3 K where land temperatures were free to change. Hence, there is apparently a large land effect on ocean surface temperatures in this case. Because D09’s perturbed land temperature experiment has only been run for 20 yr, SSTs may not have reached steady state, as the ocean model is a 500 m deep mixed layer. We emphasize that our conclusions do not contradict the hypothesis that SSTs can control shorter-term interannual variations in land temperatures, such as those due to natural variability, or that patterns of SST change are important to patterns of land temperature change in general (Cash et al. 2005; Hoerling et al. 2008). In fact, we reconfirm these ideas. In our GCM experiments, imposing changes in SST forces changes in land temperatures that maintain ϕ close to the value seen in radiatively forced experiments. In contrast to its large effect on surface fluxes, ΔA has relatively small impacts on precipitation, circulation, and cloud in the GCMs we analyze. At ΔT G = 0, there are small forcing-dependent increases in land precipitation and decreases in ocean precipitation in the slab and Hansen experiments. We expect this in the tropics, as exporting energy from land to ocean should be associated with anomalous convection over land and anomalous subsidence over ocean. Precipitation in the perturbed SST experiments does appear different from that in slab 2 × CO 2 slab equilibria, as might be expected where ΔA exists. However, in the HadAM3 +3K SST + (2 × CO 2 ) experiment, precipitation change is much more similar to the perturbed SST-only experiment than to slab equilibria, suggesting that the different patterns of SST perturbation in perturbed SST and slab experiments are much more important to changes in precipitation. In HadAM3, there are also impacts on circulation and CRF at ΔT G = 0, but the effect of changes in surface temperature dominates. We find little sign of nonlinearity when we add the responses from the separate +3K SST and 2 × CO 2 experiments and compare them to the combined +3K SST + (2 × CO 2 ) experiment (the same may not be the case for models that suffer larger cloud adjustment to CO 2 forcing than HadAM3, as described by Gregory and Webb (2008)]. Although we have no relevant data for other models, we note that Deser and Phillips (2009) came to a similar conclusion for CAM3 simulations of 1950–2000. We do not, therefore, raise an objection to projects, such as CFMIP2, that make this decomposition.

Acknowledgments We thank John Fasullo and five anonymous reviewers for their reviews. We acknowledge the modeling groups for making their simulations available for analysis, the Program for Climate Model Diagnosis and Intercomparison (PCMDI) for collecting and archiving the CMIP3 and CFMIP model output, and the WCRP’s Working Group on Coupled Modelling (WGCM) for organizing the model data analysis activity. The WCRP CMIP3 and CFMIP multimodel datasets are supported by the Office of Science, U.S. Department of Energy. The CAM3 integrations were performed on the Lightning SMP cluster maintained by NCAR. FHL and MJW were supported by the Joint DECC, Defra, and MoD Integrated Climate Programme—DECC/Defra (Programme Element GA01101) and MoD (Programme Element CBC/2B/0417_Annex C5). MMJ was supported by NCAS-Climate.

REFERENCES Section: Choose Top of page Abstract 1.Introduction 2.Mechanisms proposed to ... 3.GCM data 4.Results 5.Discussion 6.Summary REFERENCES << CITING ARTICLES