Marijuana Addiction
While Marijuana may not be as life-threatening as heroin or cocaine is, developing a marijuana addiction is possible and can have immensely negative effects on the body and brain. Marijuana is one of the most popular drugs available due to easy accessibility and the various methods of ingestion. Forming an addiction to the drug can happen quite easily, even faster than some people may realize is possible. However, managing an addiction to marijuana, like any drug, is a perfectly obtainable goal to set.

Rising in popularity within the American counterculture of the 1960s and 1970s, marijuana is now the most commonly abused illicit substance in the United States. The most common way the drug is used is when the dried leaves from the bushy plant are rolled into cigarettes or cigars and smoked. The result of smoking the cigarette or cigar is a relaxing, euphoric high that alters the smoker’s senses, memory, perception of time and motor skills. Commonly known as “weed,” “pot,” and “bud,” marijuana recently became legal in parts of the United States, spurring continued political controversy around the substance. While the legality of smoking medical marijuana is now common across the United States, in Colorado, California and Washington, D.C., smoking marijuana is also recreationally permitted.

Marijuana comes from the cannabis sativa plant. and refers to the dried leaves, stems, flowers and seeds from the green, leafy plant. People abuse marijuana because it contains delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol, also called THC, a chemical that produces euphoria, among other effects.

The cannabis plant is a green, leafy bush with distinct, five or seven-point leaves. In the marijuana counterculture, the image of the cannabis leaf is very popular symbology.

Dried marijuana ranges in color from green to brown, and looks similar to clumps of moss, and joints and blunts look very similar to hand-rolled cigarettes and cigars. Edible marijuana (baked in cookies, brownies, etc.) look virtually identical to regular versions of the food. For example, pot brownies look exactly the same as regular brownies, except their smell and taste differ.

Dabs, which is a common street name for marijuana, can vary depending on the kind of extract it inhibits. The liquid form is often called hash oil or honey oil and looks similar to other kinds of oils. Wax is a soft solid, similar to lip balm, and shatter is amber-colored solid. Oils are normally sold in small bottles, while wax or shatter are sometimes sold in the shape of small animals.

Much of the marijuana in the United States is grown locally, which is one factor that contributes to marijuana addiction. But when imported into the United States, from another country, marijuana typically comes from Mexico, Canada, Colombia, Jamaica, Thailand, Nigeria, South Africa and Kazakhstan. Imported marijuana typically comes in bricks, but individuals buying the drug on the street typically buy nickel or dime bags.

Marijuana has many nicknames, which abusers and dealers often use to avoid unwanted attention from police. Some street names for marijuana include:

Mary Jane

Weed

Pot

Kush

Herb

Bud

Grass

Ganja

Hash oil

Wax

Budder

Shatter

Dabs

Other terms related to marijuana and its abuse include:

Joint: A marijuana cigarette

Doobie: A nickname for a joint

Blunt: A marijuana cigar

Roach: The butt of a joint or blunt

Roach clip : A small metal clip used to hold the end of a joint or blunt so the user can smoke the entire thing without burning their hands

Bowl: A glass pipe for smoking marijuana

Bong: A water pipe for smoking marijuana

Head shop : A store that sells marijuana paraphernalia like bongs

Dime bag : A $10 bag of marijuana

Nickel bag : A $5 bag of marijuana

Dabbing: The act of smoking THC resin

420 : Slang for smoking marijuana

4/20 : April 20th, a notorious date for smoking marijuana to get high

K2 or Spice : Synthetic marijuana

Brick: A large, compacted block of marijuana

Marijuana users frequently combine the drug with other substances, especially in a party atmosphere. Some of these combinations can be dangerous, though, and cause risky interactions. Some common marijuana drug interactions include:

Marijuana and anticoagulants, antiplatelet or anti-inflammatory drugs: Combining marijuana with these types of drugs, including brand-names like Coumadin, Plavix, Motrin, Advil and Aleve, may increase a person’s risk of excessive bleeding. This can be especially dangerous as marijuana causes impaired motor skills and a person is more likely to hurt themselves while on the drug, which can lead to uncontrollable bleeding.

Marijuana and diabetes drugs or insulin: Marijuana possibly affects blood sugar levels. This is particularly risky for diabetics taking oral medications or insulin, as hyperglycemia or hypoglycemia can be fatal. If a person has an insulin prescription and a medical marijuana prescription, they should take these drugs under the close supervision of their doctor so they may monitor blood sugar levels and adjust doses accordingly.

Marijuana and benzodiazepines, opioids and alcohol: Combining these drugs with marijuana can result in extreme drowsiness. It’s important for those using marijuana and alcohol, Ativan, Valium, codeine, phenobarbital and other similar drugs to avoid operating heavy machinery or vehicles. In these circumstances, extreme drowsiness can cause dangerous situations.