How Many Couples are Waiting to Adopt?
How Many Couples are Waiting to Adopt?

If you are pregnant and considering adoption for your unborn baby, it will be up to you to choose the perfect adoptive parents to raise your child. But, as you scroll through the profiles of hundreds of families waiting to adopt, you may feel overwhelmed by your options. How will I find the perfect family waiting to adopt? Are there many options out there for me? Just how many families are looking to adopt?

It is difficult to find reliable statistics to answer this question. Some sources estimate that there are about 2 million couples currently waiting to adopt in the United States — which means there are as many as 36 waiting families for every one child who is placed for adoption.

Consider this: about 10 percent of women in the United States — 6.1 million — have difficulty getting or staying pregnant. While not all women facing infertility will pursue adoption, a 2002 study by the Centers for Disease Control shows that more than half (57 percent) of women who use infertility services do consider adoption.

In addition, these numbers do not take into account how many parents want to adopt for reasons other than infertility. Many more hopeful parents choose to grow their families through adoption, whether they are unmarried individuals, members of the LGBT community, or anyone else who feels that they are meant to adopt. Still many other waiting families simply don’t care whether a child is biologically related to them or not, or wish to add another child through adoption after already having conceived one or more of their own. There are many types of waiting families for adoption.

And as society continues to become more aware and accepting of the diverse types of families created through adoption, the number of waiting families for adoption continues to rise.

In fact, according to the Donaldson Adoption Institute, about 81.5 million Americans have considered adopting a child at one time in their lives. That’s about 40 percent of all U.S. adults, up from 36 percent in 1997. It’s a statistic that will likely continue to grow as more Americans understand how beautiful adoption can be. While many of these people will not actually complete the adoption process, these numbers clearly demonstrate that there are a significant number of loving families who are interested in adoption.

How Many People Want to Adopt a Baby with American Adoptions?

At any given time, American Adoptions is usually working with about 200 active families who have been pre-screened and approved to adopt. These hopeful parents come from all across the country, have many different backgrounds and have many different reasons for choosing adoption, but it’s important to know that every family waiting to adopt through American Adoptions has undergone financial, criminal and medical background checks, as well as interviews with each family member and a home inspection. You will never see a prospective adoptive family waiting to adopt through American Adoptions who cannot provide a safe, secure and loving home for your baby.

It can be difficult to determine exactly how many families want to adopt at any given time. Just know that if you are a pregnant woman considering adoption, you will find the perfect adoptive parents for your child. With so many people looking to adopt, you will have your choice of many wonderful, loving families. And at American Adoptions, we can help you to find that one family waiting to adopt that can give your child exactly the life you’re envisioning.

Where Can I See Waiting Families’ Profiles?

American Adoptions works with each family waiting to adopt to create two different kinds of adoption profiles: a print profile and a video profile. It can be overwhelming to realize how many families are waiting to adopt, but these profiles give you a way to learn more about any given waiting family prior to meeting them. Your adoption specialist will show you profiles of different waiting families for adoption that match your adoption preferences. This will show you how a family interacts with each other in their own home environment without ever having to leave the comfort of your own home.

When you find a family you’d like to meet, your adoption specialist can arrange a conference call so that you can get to know each other better.

American Adoptions provides all of the services, support and guidance you need to sort through these waiting families’ profiles and choose the one that is right for your baby.

To learn more about American Adoptions’ waiting families, how many couples are waiting to adopt with our agency, our services, or adoption in general, you may contact an adoption specialist 24/7 at 1-800-ADOPTION or request your free adoption information with no obligation.

Disclaimer

Information available through these links is the sole property of the companies and organizations listed therein. America Adoptions, Inc. provides this information as a courtesy and is in no way responsible for its content or accuracy.