Definition of Chronic by Merriam-Webster
He suffers from chronic arthritis. a chronic need for attention Inflation has become a chronic condition in the economy. Don't bother seeing that film—it's chronic.

Recent Examples on the Web

Psoriasis, a chronic skin condition, can cause red, scaly patches that may itch, crack, and bleed. Claire Gillespie, SELF, "4 Tips for Putting on Makeup When You Have Psoriasis on Your Face," 24 May 2019

On Tuesday, the same FDA panel will make recommendations on studying and defining the risks of long-term chronic conditions with breast implants. Matthew Perrone, The Seattle Times, "US experts: Too soon to pull breast implants tied to cancer," 26 Mar. 2019

Davidson said, which included chronic lung disease, neurodevelopment disorder and feeding issues. Cathy Free, The Seattle Times, "Baby born last year weighing less than a soda can heads home for the first time," 12 Apr. 2019

But the art which resists the slow sap of a chronic disease—which repairs frames enervated by lust, swollen by gluttony, or inflamed by wine . . Chris Pope, WSJ, "‘More Than Medicine’ Review: An Ounce of Prevention," 17 Mar. 2019

The issue is when that inflammation becomes chronic, which may (among other issues) prompt the ovaries to produce too many androgens, according to the Mayo Clinic. Mary Claire Lagroue, SELF, "Can Diet and Exercise Actually Improve PCOS Symptoms?," 23 Apr. 2019

America’s two biggest pharmacy chains are attempting to reverse their sagging fortunes by becoming go-to treatment centers for people with chronic illnesses. Sharon Terlep, WSJ, "CVS, Walgreens Look to the Chronically Ill for a Pharmacy Cure," 4 Apr. 2019

Mindful eating is an important part of dealing with any kind of chronic illness. Vogue, "Sea of Shoes’ Jane Aldridge on Her Battle With Endometriosis—And How She’s Coping With Chronic Pain," 1 Apr. 2019

Kale is linked to reducing your risk of chronic disease and vision loss, lowering blood pressure, and improving bone health, FWIW. Jaclyn London, Ms, Rd, Cdn, Good Housekeeping, "The New Dirty Dozen and Clean Fifteen Are Here — But Should You Care?," 20 Mar. 2019

These example sentences are selected automatically from various online news sources to reflect current usage of the word 'chronic.' Views expressed in the examples do not represent the opinion of Merriam-Webster or its editors. Send us feedback.