How Much Marijuana Does It Take For Someone To Overdose?
My friend is new to the marijuana world. He had never smoked marijuana before in his life. At the age of 50, due to health problems, he decided to start consuming marijuana because pharmaceuticals weren't working and were wreaking havoc on his body.

He always asks me questions, and I'm going to try to post answers on TWB in case there are others out there. Also, I'm hoping people post their knowledge in the comments section below so that others can benefit. If you find some good info on marijuana overdose information, feel free to post it below.

The question I'm answering today is 'how much marijuana does it take for someone to overdose?' My friend is well aware that no one in recorded history has ever died from a marijuana overdose. But he wants to know if there is any amount of marijuana that someone could overdose from. According to a 1988 United States administrative law hearing:

"7. Drugs used in medicine are routinely given what is called an LD-50. The LD-50 rating indicates at what dosage fifty percent of test animals receiving a drug will die as a result of drug induced toxicity. A number of researchers have attempted to determine marijuana's LD-50 rating in test animals, without success. Simply stated, researchers have been unable to give animals enough marijuana to induce death.

8. At present it is estimated that marijuana's LD-50 is around 1:20,000 or 1:40,000. In layman terms this means that in order to induce death a marijuana smoker would have to consume 20,000 to 40,000 times as much marijuana as is contained in one marijuana cigarette. NIDA-supplied marijuana cigarettes weigh approximately .9 grams. A smoker would theoretically have to consume nearly 1,500 pounds of marijuana within about fifteen minutes to induce a lethal response.

9. In practical terms, marijuana cannot induce a lethal response as a result of drug-related toxicity."

Even if someone is smoking marijuana concentrates or 'dabs' which can be 3-4 times more potent than their flower counterparts, that's still hundreds of pounds of marijuana dabs within a 15 minute period. A person would pass out before they experienced a lethal dose level of marijuana. Something could harm the person if they fell while passing out resulting in death, but that's different than the marijuana itself causing death. Some readers are probably wondering why the federal government fights so hard against marijuana research. Maybe it's because every time they research marijuana they find out how wrong they are...